4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
GOV
UK
Ofsted
Care Quality
Commission
Guidance
Area SEND inspections:
framework and handbook
Updated 7 July 2025
Applies to England
Contents
Introduction
The area SEND inspection framework
The area SEND inspection handbook
Part 1: The evaluation schedule - how we will assess local areas
Part 2: How local area partnerships' provision for children and young people
with SEND will be inspected
Part 3: Monitoring inspections
Part 4: Engagement meetings
Annex A: information requested to support inspections
https://wwwov.uk/goverment/publications/area-sendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolt
1/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
OGL
© Crown copyright 2025
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where
otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-
licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London
TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-
framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook
https:/wwwgovuk/govement/pubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolt
2/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
!
This guidance came into force on 6 June 2025
Introduction
1. This document sets out the framework and handbook for inspecting local
area arrangements for children and young people with special educational
needs and/or disabilities (SEND). It was devised jointly by Ofsted and the
Care Quality Commission (CQC) for use from 2023, and reviewed and
updated in June 2025. We will continue to review and amend it periodically.
2. This document has 2 parts:
the area SEND inspection framework - this sets out the purposes and
principles of inspection and its statutory basis, along with the inspection
approach, model, frequency and timing
the area SEND inspection handbook - this sets out the evaluation criteria
that inspectors use to reach inspection outcomes, and examples of the
kinds of evidence they gather and activities they carry out to evaluate the
local area's arrangements for children and young people with SEND. It
includes information about the inspection process before, during and after
the inspection
3. These inspections are carried out jointly by Ofsted and CQC. Inspectors
who specialise in education, health and social care will work together as a
single inspection team.
Collecting and processing personal information
4. During an inspection, inspectors will gather personal data and information
that are necessary to help them evaluate local SEND arrangements.
Ofsted's privacy notice (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ofsted-
privacy-notices) and the CQC's privacy statement (https://www.cqc.org.uk/about-
us/our-policies/privacy-statement) set out what data we collect, what we do with
it, how long we keep it and people's rights under data protection legislation.
The area SEND inspection framework
http/wwwvuk/govement/ubications/area-sendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbookt
3/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
5. This framework sets out the purposes and principles of inspection and its
statutory basis, along with the inspection approach, model, frequency and
timing.
Principles and purpose of inspection
6. The purpose of inspection is to:
provide an independent, external evaluation of the effectiveness of the
local area partnership's arrangements for children and young people with
SEND
where appropriate, recommend what the local area partnership should do
to improve the arrangements
7. Inspectors will uphold the highest professional standards in their work.
They will treat everyone they meet during inspections fairly and with the
respect and sensitivity they deserve. Inspectors will work constructively with
leaders and staff, demonstrating professionalism, courtesy, empathy and
respect at all times. Inspectors will evaluate a range of evidence against the
evaluation schedule (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-
framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-
handbook#evaluation-schedule). They will follow Ofsted and CQC's published
policies and relevant legislation in areas such as safeguarding and equality.
8. Ofsted's code of conduct (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/conduct-during-ofsted-
inspections) sets out the expectations for both inspectors and providers. At
the set-up discussion, the lead inspector will explain these expectations and
ask providers to read the code. Inspectors will work with leaders and staff
constructively and will act with professionalism, courtesy, empathy and
respect.
9. Our inspections of local area partnerships:
evaluate the impact of the local area partnership's arrangements for
children and young people with SEND
provide information to help local area partnerships improve their
arrangements for children and young people with SEND, and to support
improvement of the SEND system as a whole
ensure that information on the effectiveness of the local area
partnership's SEND arrangements is available to children and young
people with SEND and their families, so they can make informed
decisions about their education, health and care
include an evaluation of the local authority's commissioning and oversight
arrangements for children and young people in alternative provision; our
reports include information on this, to help local authorities improve their
arrangements
htp://wwwgougovenment/publications/area-send-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolt
4/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
provide information for the Secretary of State for Education, the Secretary
of State for Health and Social Care, and Parliament about the
effectiveness of the local area partnership's SEND arrangements, to
enable the government to act, if necessary; this information includes
whether local area partnerships are working effectively to improve the
experiences and outcomes of children and young people with SEND
Statutory basis for area SEND inspections
10. Ofsted and CQC carry out joint inspections of local areas at the request
of the Secretary of State for Education under section 20(1)(a) of the
Children Act 2004.
[footnote 1] At their discretion, they may also carry out
monitoring inspections of local areas using their power in section 20(2) of
the Children Act 2004.
Local area partnership duties
11. Inspectors assess the extent to which the local area partners are
complying with relevant legal duties relating to arrangements for children
and young people with SEND. Relevant legal duties may include duties
under the Children and Families Act 2014, the Equality Act 2010 and the
Human Rights Act 1998.
Overarching approach to inspection
12. Inspections evaluate how well members of a local area partnership work
together to improve the experiences and outcomes of children and young
people with SEND. The focus is not on inspecting the specific individuals
who work in the local area partnership.
13. 'Local area partnership' refers to those in education, health and social
care who are responsible for the strategic planning, commissioning,
management, delivery and evaluation of arrangements for children and
young people with SEND who live in a local area. A local area is the
geographical area covered by a local authority. When evaluating the local
area partnership, inspectors focus mainly on how effectively the local
authority and integrated care board (ICB) jointly plan, evaluate and develop
services for children and young people with SEND. However, they also
consider the duties of other area partners, which are set out in the Children
and Families Act 2014 and described further in the SEND code of practice.
14. Inspections evaluate arrangements for all children and young people
with SEND aged 0 to 25 covered by the SEND code of practice, including
those who have an education, health and care (EHC) plan and those who
htt/wwwugovemet/pbicaon/areasendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbool,
5/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
receive special educational needs (SEN) support. The scope of the
inspection covers children and young people with SEND who live in the
local authority area and attend education settings or receive health and/or
care services outside of the local authority's geographical boundaries.
However, it does not cover those who live in other local areas and attend an
education setting within the local authority's boundaries.
15. The inspection will consider whether local authorities' approach to
commissioning and overseeing alternative provision arrangements for
children and young people in the local authority area meets their duties as
set out in section 19 of the Education Act 1996 and in statutory guidance.
[footnote 2]
Inspection model
16. The area SEND inspection system is an on-going cycle of inspection
activity. We use previous area SEND inspection outcomes as well as the
intelligence and information we have to inform our decisions about the
timing and type of inspection.
17. The area SEND inspection system includes:
full inspections, which evaluate and report on the impact of the local area
partnership's arrangements for children and young people with SEND.
We ask all areas to update and publish their strategic plans after a full
inspection. Where we have identified areas for priority action, we will
require the area to publish a priority action plan (area SEND), in line with
Regulations 3 and 4 of the Children Act 2004 (Joint Area Reviews)
Regulations 2015. This will ensure that the area fulfils the requirement
under the previous framework to produce a written statement of action
(WSoA)
monitoring inspections of local areas that were identified as having
widespread and/or systemic failings at their full inspection. These
inspections will evaluate and report on what the local area partnership
has done to address the areas for priority action that Ofsted and CQC
identified at the previous full inspection. Monitoring inspections may also
be carried out at the discretion of Ofsted and CQC where serious
concerns have been identified through intelligence gathered outside a full
inspection
engagement meetings between Ofsted, CQC and representatives of the
local area partnership. The purpose of these meetings is for Ofsted, CQC
and the local area partnership to discuss the partnership's self-evaluation,
SEND action plan, any challenges, and how leaders are addressing
them. These meetings do not result in an evaluative outcome
p:/wwwo.govenmet/ubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook
6/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
area SEND thematic visits to a small number of areas, to investigate a
particular aspect of the SEND system in depth. These visits do not result
in an evaluative outcome, although we do share our findings from the
visits in a national report
The guidance for each set of thematic visits will be published separately.
18. Following a full inspection, inspectors will report on the effectiveness of
the local area partnership's arrangements for children and young people
with SEND. The report will include:
the inspection outcome
what it is like to be a child or young person with SEND in the local area
what the local area partnership is doing well and what needs to be
improved
recommendations for improvements that the local area partnership
should act on
whether any areas for priority action have been identified, and which area
partners are responsible for addressing them
the likely type and timing of the next inspection activity
Frequency and type of area SEND inspections,
monitoring inspections and meetings
19. All local areas will receive a full inspection at least once during a 5-year
period. The frequency and type of inspection activity in any individual local
area will be based on previous inspection outcomes and any relevant
additional information. This includes regional intelligence and information
that the local area partnership shares during engagement meetings.
20. Ofsted and CQC use the information we have when deciding how best
to inspect each local area partnership. There will be times when concerns
arise about a local area partnership. When this happens, the Ofsted
regional director, in discussion with CQC, will decide whether to bring
forward a full inspection or carry out a monitoring inspection.
21. There are 3 possible full inspection outcomes, leading to different
subsequent inspection activity:
htt/wwogvemet/ubicais/areasend-framework-and-handook/areasend-inspections-framework-and-handbodk
7/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
Inspection outcome
Subsequent meetings
and inspection activities
The local area partnership's SEND
Engagement meetings
arrangements typically lead to positive
experiences and outcomes for children
Full inspection usually
and young people with SEND. The local
within 5 years
area partnership is taking action where
improvements are needed.
The local area partnership's arrangements
Engagement meetings
lead to inconsistent experiences and
outcomes for children and young people
Full inspection usually
with SEND. The local area partnership
within 3 years
must work jointly to make improvements.
There are widespread and/or systemic
Engagement meetings
failings leading to significant concerns
about the experiences and outcomes of
Submission of priority
children and young people with SEND,
action plan (area SEND)
which the local area partnership must
address urgently.
Monitoring inspection,
usually 18 months from the
date when the local area
partnership receives its
final full inspection report
Full inspection, usually
within 3 years
22. If we become aware of information that suggests a significant
deterioration in performance or a serious concern, Ofsted and CQC may
carry out a monitoring inspection or bring forward an area's full inspection to
take place sooner than originally planned.
23. If the local authority in the local area is also receiving monitoring visits
under the 'Inspecting local authority children's services' framework
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/inspecting-local-authority-childrens
services-from-2018/inspecting-local-authority-childrens-services), there will usually
be no more than 3 monitoring visits across both frameworks within a 12-
month period.
24. Under the previous area SEND inspection framework, His Majesty's
Chief Inspector (HMCI) required local areas identified as having significant
weaknesses to produce a WSoA. Local areas with a WSoA that were not
revisited under the previous framework will usually have a full inspection
within the first 3 years of the new inspection cycle.
http/wwwvuk/govement/ubications/area-sendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbookt
8/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
25. New local areas will usually have a full inspection within 3 years of
coming into existence. Any monitoring inspections that were planned for the
predecessor local area or areas will not be carried out.
26. There are other Ofsted and CQC inspections that will involve local area
partners. When possible, we will take the timing of these inspections into
account when planning the overall inspection schedule.
The area SEND inspection handbook
27. This handbook sets out how inspectors gather evidence and evaluate a
local area partnership's arrangements for children and young people with
SEND. This handbook is primarily a guide for inspectors on how to carry out
area SEND inspections. We have made it publicly available so that children
and young people with SEND, families, local area leaders, practitioners, and
other organisations are informed about the processes and procedures of
inspection.
28. The handbook balances the need for consistency in inspections with the
flexibility required to respond to the individual circumstances of each local
area. It should not be regarded as a set of inflexible rules, but as a broad
account of inspection procedures. When applying the guidance in this
handbook, inspectors will take appropriate action to comply with Ofsted and
CQC's duties under the Equality Act 2010.
29. During the inspection, inspectors will visit providers such as early years
settings, schools, alternative provision and colleges. In addition, inspectors
may visit providers in specialist health and social care services, or those
providing early help, support or services, to gather evidence.
[footnote
3]
Any
setting that we visit will not be under inspection; the provision will remain
subject to separate inspection arrangements in line with Ofsted and CQC's
statutory and regulatory duties and powers.
30. This handbook has 4 parts:
Part 1: The evaluation schedule - the evaluation criteria that inspectors
use to reach an inspection outcome
Part 2: How local area partnerships will be inspected - information about
the processes before, during and after an inspection
Part 3: Monitoring inspections - the purpose and details of monitoring
inspections
Part 4: Engagement meetings - the purpose and details of engagement
meetings
htps:/wwwgovukgovenment/ubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolk
9/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
Part 1: The evaluation schedule - how
we will assess local areas
31. Ofsted and CQC have identified the features of effective local SEND
arrangements from research, inspection evidence and consultation with
children, young people, families, leaders and practitioners. We have used
these features to create the evaluation criteria. Inspectors will use the
evaluation criteria to determine the effectiveness of the local area
partnership's SEND arrangements and their impact on the experiences and
outcomes of children and young people.
32. Inspectors will evaluate the impact of the local area partnership's
arrangements on the experiences and outcomes of children and young
people with SEND, including the extent to which:
children and young people's needs are identified accurately and
assessed in a timely and effective way
children, young people and their families participate in decision-making
about their individual plans and support
children and young people receive the right help at the right time
children and young people are well prepared for their next steps, and
achieve strong outcomes
children and young people are valued, visible and included in their
communities
33. Inspectors will evaluate how the local area partners work together to
plan, evaluate and develop the SEND system, including the extent to which:
leaders are ambitious for children and young people with SEND
leaders actively engage and work with children, young people and
families
leaders have an accurate, shared understanding of the needs of children
and young people in their local area
leaders commission services and provision to meet the needs and
aspirations of children and young people, including commissioning
arrangements for children and young people in alternative provision
leaders evaluate services and make improvements
leaders create an environment in which effective practice and multi-
agency working can flourish
https:/wwwgovukgovemet/pubications/areasendframework-and-handbook/area-sendinspections-framework-and-handbook
10/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
34. The evaluation schedule is not exhaustive. In applying it, inspectors will
use their professional judgement, together with the instructions and
guidance in part 2 (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-
framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook#part-
two).
35. The evaluation schedule is a guide for inspectors. It can also support
the local area partnership in its self-evaluation and ongoing improvement
activities.
Approach to inspection outcomes
36. Following a full inspection, inspectors will give an overall summary
outcome about the local area partnership. This inspection outcome reflects
the inspectors' evaluation of the impact of the local area partnership's
arrangements on the experiences and outcomes of children and young
people with SEND.
37. Inspectors will use their professional judgement to decide how much
evidence they need to gather against each of the evaluation criteria,
following lines of enquiry as they emerge, to reach the final inspection
outcome.
Inspection outcomes
38. There are 3 inspection outcomes:
The local area partnership's arrangements typically lead to positive
experiences and outcomes for children and young people with SEND.
The local area partnership is taking action where improvements are
needed.
The next full area SEND inspection will be within 5 years.
Ofsted and CQC ask the local area partnership to update and publish its
strategic plan based on the recommendations set out in this report.
The local area partnership's arrangements lead to inconsistent
experiences and outcomes for children and young people with SEND.
The local area partnership must work jointly to make improvements.
The next full area SEND inspection will take place within approximately
3 years.
hwwwuvenmet/ubications/rea-send-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook.
11/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
Ofsted and CQC ask that the local area partnership updates and
publishes its strategic plan based on the recommendations set out in
this report.
There are widespread and/or systemic failings leading to significant
concerns about the experiences and outcomes of children and young
people with SEND, which the local area partnership must address
urgently.
A monitoring inspection will be carried out within approximately 18
months. The next full area SEND inspection will take place within
approximately 3 years.
HMCI requires the local area partnership to prepare and submit a
priority action plan (area SEND) to address the identified areas for
priority action.
Reaching an outcome that the local area partnership's arrangements
typically lead to positive experiences and outcomes
39. Inspectors will reach this outcome if, having gathered and evaluated
evidence using the evaluation criteria, they find that:
children and young people are typically achieving strong outcomes, and
children and young people's experiences of their education, health and
care are typically positive, and
the local area partnership has identified any areas for improvement and is
taking effective action to address them, and
there are no areas for priority action
Reaching an outcome that the local area partnership's arrangements
lead to inconsistent experiences and outcomes
40. Inspectors will reach this outcome if:
any of the points in relation to the experiences and outcomes of children
and young people in paragraph 39 are not met, but
there are no areas for priority action
Reaching an outcome that there are widespread and/or systemic
failings
41. Inspectors will reach this outcome when:
they have identified one or more areas for priority action; this will happen
when there are significant concerns about the experiences and outcomes
https://wwwgov.uk/govenment/pubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framewor-and-handbodl,
12/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
of children and young people, because of particular systemic or
widespread failings that have a significant negative impact on the
experiences and outcomes of children and young people
Experiences and outcomes
42. The evaluation criteria describe the features of effective SEND
arrangements. Inspectors will evaluate the impact of the local area
partnership's SEND arrangements through the experiences and outcomes
of children and young people.
43. Inspectors will evaluate individual children and young people's
outcomes as part of their assessment of the local area partnership's self-
evaluation of its strategic outcomes. Strategic outcomes are the outcomes
that partnership leaders want to see for all children and young people in
their local area. Inspectors will evaluate individuals' outcomes through
activities such as tracking and sampling. Themes are likely to include, but
are not limited to: health and well-being, communication, independence,
positive relationships, community participation, moving into further and
higher education and/or employment and preparation for adulthood.
44. Inspectors will evaluate outcomes as described in the SEND code of
practice, including the individual outcomes that children and young people
with SEND have told us are important to them. Inspectors will assess
whether outcomes are sufficiently ambitious and reflect high expectations.
This includes whether children and young people with SEND:
have developed the knowledge, skills and behaviours to gain employment
or meaningful occupation, move on to further or higher education, and/or
live as healthily and as independently as possible
have developed their self-esteem and resilience
have made friends, and feel safe, valued and visible in their local
communities
45. When evaluating experiences, inspectors will assess whether children
and young people's experiences of education, health and care in their local
area are positive, and why. They will evaluate whether children and young
people with SEND:
have gained from stable, supportive relationships and environments
have had the opportunity to participate in community activities to widen
their understanding of the opportunities available to them now and in their
future
have participated in decision-making about their own plans and support
have had support provided when they have needed it, feel supported and
believe that adults understand and advocate for them.
tp:/wwwgvenmet/ubicaos/areasendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook
13/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
46. Inspectors will also seek to understand how children and young people
have been supported through any adverse experiences they may have had.
47. Inspectors will not emphasise one type of evidence above others.
Inspectors will gather evidence that is balanced and connected, to form a
picture of the typical experiences and outcomes of children and young
people and how the local area partnership's SEND arrangements have led
to these.
The evaluation criteria
48. This section provides detail about what inspectors will consider when
evaluating against each criterion.
49. The evaluation criteria apply across education, health and care, and to
all children and young people with SEND aged 0 to 25 covered by the
SEND code of practice, including those receiving SEN support and those
with EHC plans.
50. Inspectors will evaluate the local authority's commissioning and
oversight of alternative provision for all children and young people who
attend, not only those with SEND.
The needs of children and young people with SEND are identified
accurately and assessed in a timely and effective way
51. Inspectors will take account of the extent to which:
children and young people are accurately identified as having SEND
children and young people's needs are identified in a timely way, to
prevent needs from escalating, whenever possible
practitioners assess the strengths and determine the aspirations of the
child or young person alongside their individual needs
the criteria for carrying out assessments of need and for accessing
services and support are understood, and the application of these criteria
improves outcomes
timely referrals are made to other services and agencies, where
necessary
Children and young people with SEND and their families participate in
decision-making about their individual plans and support
52. Inspectors will take account of the extent to which:
children and young people access impartial information, advice and
support that enables them to make informed choices about their future
http://wwwovuk/goverment/pubications/area-sendframework-and-handbook/area-sendinspections-frameworkand-handboolt
14/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
children, young people and their families are supported to understand
their rights, make choices and contribute to decision-making about their
plans and support
children and young people understand their plans and support, including
intended outcomes, and why some changes are not possible
Children and young people with SEND receive the right help and
support at the right time
53. Inspectors will take account of the extent to which:
plans are developed and support is provided in a timely way, and meets
children and young people's needs
children and young people receive support based on their identified
needs when they are awaiting assessment
plans and support are coordinated within and, where necessary, across
providers and services, and are based on a shared understanding of the
child or young person
plans and support are regularly reviewed and updated to reflect changes
in children and young people's skills, independence, understanding and
other factors in their lives, including reduced support in line with reduced
need where appropriate
the wider needs of the child or young person's family are considered, and
barriers to learning and participation are addressed
Children and young people with SEND are well prepared for their next
steps and achieve strong outcomes
54. Inspectors will take account of the extent to which:
the outcomes that are the most important to children, young people and
their families are understood and planned for
support and plans reflect children and young people's ambitions, and
extend beyond required levels of support (such as the number of hours of
support from a particular service) to focus on the planned outcome
children and young people are supported before and during any point of
transition, including when they will no longer be eligible for a service
from an early age, children and young people develop the knowledge,
skills and behaviours necessary to prepare for greater independence and
adulthood, including in the areas of further and higher education,
employment, more independent living, optimal health, positive
relationships and participation in society
Children and young people with SEND are valued, visible and included
in their communities
55. Inspectors will take account of the extent to which:
t:/ww.govenmet/ubicatos/areasendframework-and-handbook/area-sendinspections-framework-and-handbook.
15/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
children, young people and their families understand what community
activities are available
children and young people are supported to participate, where
appropriate, in activities, and to make friends and develop positive
relationships
children and young people are supported to develop their confidence,
resilience and knowledge, so that they can participate in universal and
specialist activities as appropriate
Leaders are ambitious for children and young people with SEND
56. Inspectors will take account of the extent to which:
leaders have an ambitious strategy that defines the shared outcomes
they will work collectively to achieve for all children and young people
with SEND, and they embed an aspirational culture of high expectations
and quality across services and provision
leaders understand their responsibilities and accountabilities, including
their statutory duties and their individual responsibilities in the wider area
strategy
responsibilities are delegated in line with leaders' legal duties and there is
strong oversight of the resulting activities
processes for making decisions are structured so that the leaders
responsible can swiftly agree to the changes that are required to improve
services
leaders challenge themselves and each other to improve experiences
and outcomes for children and young people
Leaders actively engage and work with children and young people
with SEND and their families
57. Inspectors will take account of the extent to which:
leaders consider the specific needs of groups of children and young
people with SEND, and how best to engage them in co-production
leaders ensure that decisions relating to services are appropriately
shaped by children and young people's needs, experiences, ambitions
and outcomes
leaders give feedback to children, young people and their families on
changes they have made to their area's services, and explain where
change is not possible and why
Leaders have an accurate, shared understanding of the needs of
children and young people with SEND in their local area
58. Inspectors will take account of the extent to which:
:/ww.govenmet/ubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook.
16/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
leaders gather accurate, timely information about children and young
people with SEND in their local area and monitor the changing needs of
the population, including using the perspectives of children, young people
and their families
leaders understand the experiences and outcomes of children and young
people with SEND in their area; their backgrounds and identities,
including any barriers to them accessing support; and their needs and
strengths
leaders share information across education, care and health services so
they can learn from different perspectives and approaches
Leaders commission services and provision to meet the needs and
aspirations of children and young people with SEND
59. Inspectors will take account of the extent to which:
services and systems have been designed around the needs of children
and young people, and are informed by evidence of what works in
achieving good outcomes
joint commissioning arrangements enable partners to make best use of
all the resources available to improve outcomes for children and young
people in the most efficient, effective, equitable and sustainable way
joint commissioning arrangements meet the local area's statutory
responsibilities for identifying, assessing and meeting needs
leaders understand that children and young people with SEND may be
more vulnerable to abuse, and ensure that this is carefully considered
when commissioning and evaluating services
the local authority identifies children and young people's needs accurately
and arranges suitable full-time educational provision to meet the needs of
children or young people who require alternative provision as early as
possible, for example, ensuring that full-time education for children and
young people who have been excluded begins no later than the sixth day
of the exclusion
the local authority ensures that there are intervention plans for each child
and young person in alternative provision, including clear objectives and
plans for their next steps, such as returning to mainstream education
Leaders evaluate services and make improvements
60. Inspectors will take account of the extent to which:
leaders jointly evaluate whether their services and provision are
improving outcomes for children and young people with SEND, not only
whether children and young people have received the services
leaders monitor whether there are sufficient services and provision to
meet the needs and aspirations of the children and young people in their
area and take appropriate action as a result
t/wwvgvemet/ubcaos/areasendframework-and-handbook/area-sendinspections-framework-and-handbook
17/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
leaders use information from a range of sources in their evaluation to
improve their services and provision, including feedback from
representative groups, children and young people who use services and
data relating to outcomes
leaders have established clear processes to enable services and
providers to evaluate and improve their provision regularly
the local authority evaluates how well the alternative provision it
commissions is improving outcomes for children and young people, and
takes action if needed
the local authority maintains strong oversight arrangements for alternative
provision it commissions, including oversight of each alternative
provision's safety and suitability, and in particular of alternative providers
that are not registered as schools
Leaders create an environment for effective practice and multi-agency
working to flourish
61. Inspectors will take account of the extent to which:
processes and systems are set up to support practitioners to work
together and share appropriate information in a timely manner, including
strong systems for identifying and responding to risks to children and
young people with SEND
leaders ensure that practitioners are clear on their individual roles and
how they can best work together to improve outcomes for children and
young people
leaders ensure that practitioners have the appropriate skills to understand
children and young people's needs and aspirations, and to create an
inclusive environment
leaders encourage practitioners working together to focus on the child or
young person, identifying alternative solutions when existing options do
not meet needs and aspirations effectively
leaders ensure that practitioners working with children and young people
with SEND have the right knowledge and skills to reduce the risk of harm,
and understand that children and young people with SEND may be more
vulnerable to abuse, neglect and exploitation
Alternative provision
62. Inspectors will use the evaluation criteria to evaluate the local authority's
commissioning and oversight of alternative provision for all children and
young people in placements directly commissioned by the local authority.
This includes evaluating how the local authority ensures that placements:
http:/wwwgovukgovemet/pubicaion/area-sendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbookt
18/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
meet the needs and aspirations of children and young people; provide the
support they need; prepare them for their next steps; and enable them to
feel valued and included in their community. Inspectors will consider
whether the local authority's use of unregistered and online provision is
appropriate to children and young people's needs.
63. Inspectors will gather evidence to help evaluate the experiences and
outcomes of children and young people with SEND in alternative provision
commissioned by the local authority. Where local authorities work with
schools or trusts to commission and oversee placements, inspectors may
gather and evaluate evidence about the local authority's role. In Ofsted
education inspections, inspectors evaluate the experiences of children and
young people in alternative provision commissioned directly by schools.
64. Section 19 of the Education Act 1996 places a duty on local authorities
to arrange alternative educational provision in school or elsewhere 'for
pupils who, because of exclusion, illness or other reasons, would not
otherwise receive suitable education'. [footnote 4] The education provided
under section 19 should be full time and suitable for the child, taking
account of their age, ability and special educational needs (if any). Where
full-time education would not be in the child's best interests for reasons
relating to their physical or mental health, local authorities must arrange
part-time education on whatever basis they consider to be in the child's best
interests.
65. When evaluating the local authority's commissioning and oversight of
alternative provision, including unregistered provision, inspectors will:
meet local authority leaders to understand their strategy for
commissioning and oversight of alternative provision
meet local authority leaders to understand their strategic use and
oversight of unregistered alternative provision
review information provided to Ofsted by the authority about its alternative
provision arrangements
have discussions with senior leaders and special educational needs
coordinators to understand the authority's processes and decision-
making
review the fair access protocols
carry out sampling activities in one or more alternative provision settings
Legal duties
https:/wwwgovukgovement/pubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolt
19/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
66. The area SEND framework focuses on the impact of the local area
partnership's arrangements for children and young people with SEND. Its
fulfilment of legal duties is part of this impact. Inspectors will not check
compliance with every legal duty in relation to children and young people
with SEND. However, there are legal duties underpinning our evaluation
criteria. Where inspectors find that those duties are not being met, they will
report on how this affects children and young people with SEND.
67. The legal duties that may be considered include duties outlined in the
SEND code of practice (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-code-
of-practice-0-to-25) and in the Department for Education (DfE)'s alternative
provision guidance (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/alternative-
provision).
Other areas of focus
68. Inspectors may gather evidence in relation to the oversight of children
and young people with SEND who are not attending a school or alternative
provision. This includes children and young people with SEND who are
educated somewhere other than a school, are not on a school roll or are
home educated. Examples include those who receive special education
through education otherwise than at school (EOTAS) arrangements and
those who are on flexi-schooling arrangements.
69. Inspectors may also consider the local area partnership's approach to
improving the attendance of children and young people with SEND at
education settings. Some children and young people with SEND face
greater barriers to attendance than their peers and may need additional
support to help them access the education they are entitled to. Overall,
children and young people with SEND have lower attendance rates than
their peers, on average, and this affects their future outcomes. Inspectors
will also evaluate information in relation to part-time timetables and may ask
for further information. The DfE's attendance guidance
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/working-together-to-improve-school-
attendance) explains the responsibilities of all partners, including local
authorities.
70. Inspectors may consider the local area partnership's oversight and
commissioning for children and young people who are placed in residential
special schools, including those who are placed outside their local authority
area and those who are in residential special schools for more than 295
days a year. Inspectors may evaluate how effectively the local area
partnership is ensuring that these children and young people are being
safeguarded, having positive experiences and achieving strong outcomes.
:/ww.govenmet/ubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook.
20/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
Safeguarding
71. Safeguarding is not a specific evaluation area, but inspectors will always
consider it as part of any inspection activity. Inspectors will look at how well
children and young people are helped and protected so that they are kept
safe. Inspectors will follow established procedures if they receive
information during the inspection that raises concerns about the
safeguarding of children or young people. This includes following up
concerns with the appropriate leaders in the local area.
72. Safeguarding concerns: guidance for inspectors
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ofsted-safeguarding-
policy/safeguarding-concerns-guidance-for-inspectors) should be read alongside
this guidance. It sets out the approach inspectors should take to inspecting
safeguarding. It is essential that inspectors, local area partners, and
individual providers are also familiar with, and follow, statutory guidance on
safeguarding:
'Keeping children safe in education: statutory guidance for schools and
colleges
[footnote 5]
'Working together to safeguard children 2023'.
[footnote 6]
Part 2: How local area partnerships'
provision for children and young people
with SEND will be inspected
73. This part sets out the methodology for full inspections.
How local areas are selected for inspection
74. All local areas will have a full inspection at least once during a 5-year
period. The type and timing of the inspection will be based on the area's
previous inspection outcomes, as set out in paragraphs 19 and 21
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-framework-and-
handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook#type-and-timing, of the
framework. The selection of local areas to be inspected will, wherever
possible, take account of the timing of other Ofsted and CQC inspection
activity. Inspections will usually take place during school term time.
http:/wwwvuk/govement/ubications/area-sendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbookt
21/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
75. Where intelligence suggests that there are concerns about
arrangements for children and young people with SEND in a particular local
area, we may inspect that local area at any time.
Composition of the inspection team
76. The inspection team will be led by one of His Majesty's Inspectors (HMI)
from Ofsted, and will include Children's Services Inspectors from CQC, and
education and social care inspectors from Ofsted.
77. Ofsted and CQC may vary the composition and size of the inspection
team. We will base this decision on several factors, including the complexity
of the local SEND system, and the size and nature of the geographical area.
78. At times, other Ofsted and CQC inspectors may visit on site, to shadow
the work of the inspection team. This is done for training, development and
quality assurance purposes only. Any activities carried out by these
inspectors will not form part of the evidence gathered by the inspection
team or contribute in any way to the team's evaluation.
Overview of the inspection
79. Area SEND full inspections will follow the structure set out below. The
lead inspector will provide a detailed timeline when they notify leaders in the
local area of the inspection.
80. Inspection activities are structured to enable inspectors to draw together
evidence from across education, health and care services and form a
connection between the different findings to reach an inspection outcome.
Inspectors will use their evaluation of children and young people's
experiences and outcomes to build a picture of the impact of the local area's
SEND arrangements. During the inspection, inspectors will need to speak to
a range of people. They will do so in line with our code of conduct, and act
at all times with professionalism, courtesy, empathy and respect. Inspectors
should take careful account of the well-being of leaders and staff. They
should adjust their approach or activity, as appropriate, as they go about
their inspection work. If inspectors see or suspect that a staff member
(including all leaders) is upset or distressed at any point during the
inspection, inspectors should respond sensitively. Where appropriate,
inspectors will consider suitable adjustments to enable the staff member to
continue. Where there are serious concerns, inspectors will normally
contact the duty desk and inform those responsible for the person's well-
being. There may be exceptional occasions when we need to consider
htt://wwwu/goverment/ubications/area-sendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolk
22/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
pausing an inspection. We will consider these on a case-by-case basis
according to our published guidance on pausing inspections
(https://www.gov.uk/guidance/pausing-state-funded-school-inspections).
Activities in week 1
Inspectors notify the local area leaders of the inspection 8 working days
before the fieldwork begins and 10 working days before coming on site.
This will usually be on a Monday, but may be in the previous week if there
is a bank holiday in week 1 or 2 of the inspection.
Inspectors request information to support the inspection (this information
is set out in Annex A (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-
framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-
handbook#annex-A) of this guidance).
Inspectors and local area leaders hold a set-up discussion (this is carried
out virtually).
The local area partnership distributes links to the surveys for children and
young people with SEND, parents and carers, and practitioners (please
see paragraph 90 (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-
framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-
handbook#SEND-surveys) for additional information.
We will update our information about ongoing area SEND inspections
page (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/local-area-send-inspections-
information-for-families) with details of the inspection, including a link to the
survey.
The local area partnership shares information to support the inspection.
Inspectors select individual children and young people, and ask the local
area partnership to set up tracking meetings.
Inspectors carry out planning and pre-inspection analysis.
Activities in week 2
Inspectors work with the local area partnership to agree an inspection
timetable.
Inspectors hold tracking meetings (please see paragraph 100 for
additional information).
Inspectors carry out pre-inspection analysis and review the information
set out in Annex A https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-
framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-
handbook#annex-A).
Inspectors may meet virtually with local leaders, staff, representative
groups and stakeholders.
Activities in week 3
Inspectors gather evidence on site, including sampling visits, focused
sampling and meetings with children and young people, families and
https://wwwgovuk/goverment/pubication/area-sendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolt
23/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
representative groups.
Inspection findings fed back to the local area partnership.
Including the views of children and young people and families during
the inspection
81. The inspectors will gather evidence directly from children and young
people and their families during the inspection. Inspectors will form their
initial lines of enquiry by gathering evidence about recent experiences from:
inspection surveys
tracking meetings with children, young people, parents, carers and
practitioners
meetings with representative groups and local area leaders
82. Inspectors will continue to consider the views of children, young people
and their families about their recent experiences as they test their initial
lines of enquiry and gather further evidence to evaluate the broader
framework through activities, including:
sampling visits across a range of settings and providers within the local
area - during these visits, inspectors will sample the experiences and
outcomes of children and young people across education, health and
care; inspectors may contact families whose records have been sampled
during the inspection week to seek their views
focused sampling to look specifically at certain areas of SEND - during
focused sampling, inspectors may speak with children and young people,
families and practitioners to gather evidence
meet with stakeholders, which may include the parent carer forum,
children, young people and family representative groups and providers
from other services
Inspectors will use these inspection activities to hear about recent
experiences directly from children, young people, families and practitioners
to understand the impact of the local area's commissioning arrangements
on their experiences and outcomes (see paragraphs 43 to 47).
Pre-inspection activity
83. Ofsted and CQC inspectors will review relevant information held by the
inspectorates about the local area arrangements for children and young
people with SEND. This will include previous inspection outcomes and any
WSoA that an area was required to produce under the previous framework.
http://wwwovukgovemet/pubicaions/areasendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolk
24/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
Week 1: notification, set-up and information request
Notification
84. On day 1 (10 working days before the on-site evidence-gathering),
inspectors will contact the relevant leaders in the local area to notify them of
the inspection:
Ofsted will notify the director of children's services (DCS)
CQC will notify the chief executive of the ICB
85. Each local area will be asked to nominate a representative - a local
area nominated officer (LANO) - who will act as a single point of contact on
behalf of the local area partnership throughout the inspection. If the LANO is
a representative of the ICB, the local area must also nominate a
representative from the local authority. Alternatively, if the LANO is a
representative of the local authority, the local area must also nominate a
representative from the ICB. Their roles will be to liaise with the lead
inspector throughout the inspection, so that inspection activities can be
coordinated effectively.
86. While it is important that we carry out our planned inspections wherever
possible, sometimes there may be reasons why a planned inspection may
not go ahead. Ofsted and CQC will only defer the inspection of a local area
in exceptional circumstances. If a local area partnership has a concern
about the timing of an inspection, it may submit a deferral request in line
with Ofsted's deferral policy (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/deferring-ofsted-
inspections).
Set-up discussion
87. Once the inspection has been confirmed, the lead inspector and CQC
inspector will make an extended telephone call to the LANO and the ICB
representative. The lead inspector will make it clear that the LANO and the
ICB representative are encouraged to have someone present during the call
to assist and support them if they wish. This should be at least one other
senior leader who typically deputises for them and can understand and
discuss the content of the call. The purpose of this call is to:
check on the leaders' well-being and whether any steps need to be taken
to ensure any issues or concerns are addressed, including that
appropriate support is available. The lead inspector should ascertain how
to contact whoever is responsible for the leaders' well-being on a day-to-
day basis, so that they can pass on well-being concerns if appropriate
and necessary
discuss the arrangements for the inspection, including the timetable of
activities, arrangements for talking to children, young people and their
http://wwwuk/goverment/pubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolk
25/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
families, the key officers and representatives to involve in specific
meetings, and arrangements for giving regular feedback and having
discussions regarding the emerging findings of the inspection
discuss the arrangements for distributing the survey links to children,
young people, parents, carers, and practitioners
discuss the information requested for the inspection (Annex A
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-framework-and-
handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook#annex-A))
ask that the key stakeholders involved in arrangements for children and
young people with SEND and the commissioning of alternative provision
are made aware of the inspections, including providers, services, parents
and carers
provide an opportunity for leaders to raise any issues or concerns, or to
seek clarification before the inspection, and explain how the local area
partnership will be able to raise any matters during the inspection itself
provide an opportunity for leaders to discuss and/or give inspectors
information on potential equality duties, including reasonable adjustments
for individuals
Information request (Annex A)
88. Annex A https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-framework-
and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbookannex-A sets out
the information inspectors will request and the timeline for the local area
partnership to share it. Any evidence submitted should be a part of the local
area partners' routine business and not produced solely for inspection.
89. Inspectors may ask for additional information not set out in Annex A
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-framework-and-
handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook#annex-A), and may
agree to look at additional information provided by the area partners. Any
additional information must be:
necessary for an accurate understanding of children and young people's
experiences and outcomes in relation to the scope of the inspection
part of the local area partners' business as usual and not produced solely
for inspection
Arrangements for surveys
90. Inspectors will share 4 surveys: one for children and young people with
SEND, one for parents and carers, an Easy Read version of the parent and
carer survey and one for practitioners. The purpose of these surveys is for
people to share their recent experiences with the inspection team to support
inspectors when developing initial lines of enquiry. The questions have been
developed with children and young people's groups, parent carer forums,
and local area leaders and practitioners.
https:/wwwgov.u/govenment/pubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolk
26/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
91. The surveys will go live on the day the local area is notified of the
inspection. They will remain live for 6 working days from the notification day.
On the day of notification, local area partnerships should arrange for survey
links to be sent to all children and young people with SEND in their local
area, their parents and carers, and made available to all settings and
services working with children and young people with SEND. We will also
update our information about ongoing area SEND inspections page
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/local-area-send-inspections-
information-for-families) with links to our inspection survey once we notify.
Inspectors will ensure that they work with the local area partnership to
consider accessibility issues, including making paper copies available on
request.
Selecting children and young people for tracking meetings
92. During week 1, inspectors will select approximately 6 children and
young people to be involved in tracking meetings. These are meetings with
children and young people, their parents or carers (if appropriate) and the
practitioners who are directly involved with them. The meetings are for
inspectors to hear about children and young people's experiences and
outcomes. Tracking meetings will help inspectors to establish initial lines of
enquiry before they begin their on-site activity.
93. When selecting the children and young people to track, inspectors will
take into account: information shared by the local area partnership; the
demographic make-up of the local area, including protected characteristics
defined by the Equality Act 2010; and any contextual issues specific to the
local area. They will choose children and young people with a range of
needs, who access a range of services, from a range of age groups and
who are at different stages in their education and/or involvement with health
and social care services. The scope is children and young people for whom
the local authority is responsible. This includes children and young people
with an EHC plan for whom the local authority is responsible but who are
educated outside the local authority area. It also includes those who have
been placed in children's homes and educational establishments out of
area. However, the scope does not cover children and young people who
live in other areas but attend education within the local area boundaries.
94. Inspectors will usually include at least 1 child or young person who is
studying in alternative provision, and at least 2 children who are receiving
SEN support. Inspectors will include a few children receiving social care
support and this may include a child placed out of the local area. Inspectors
will usually include at least one child or young person whose needs are in
each of the 4 categories of need: communication and interaction; cognition
and learning; social, emotional and mental health difficulties; sensory and/or
physical needs.
95. Once children and young people have been selected, the LANO will:
h:/wwwov.u/govenment/publications/erea-send-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolt
27/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
arrange for a practitioner who knows the child or young person well to
approach them, and their parents or carers, for their agreement to be
involved
share information about the child or young person as outlined in Annex A
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-framework-and-
handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook#annex-A)
arrange tracking meetings with children and young people, their parents
and carers
arrange a multi-disciplinary tracking meeting with practitioners who work
with the child or young person
Week 2: off-site analysis and creating an on-site
timetable
Off-site analysis
96. Inspectors will review the information requested from the local area
partners outlined in Annex A (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-
send-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-
handbook#annex-A).
Creating the inspection timetable
97. The Ofsted lead inspector will coordinate the creation of a timetable for
gathering evidence off site in week 2, and on site in week 3. They will work
jointly with the lead inspector from CQC to liaise with the LANO and the ICB
representative to help create the timetable. This will include arrangements
for meeting with practitioners, managers and leaders to discuss their work.
Inspectors will also make arrangements for keep-in-touch and feedback
meetings to share inspectors' findings.
98. When creating the timetable, the Ofsted lead inspector and CQC lead
inspector will:
consider which activities should be carried out in person, and which
should be carried out by phone or video call
include enough time for inspectors to travel between appointments
include time for inspectors to review and analyse their evidence,
individually and together
ensure that the timetable is flexible enough to be changed in response to
emerging findings
work with the LANO and ICB representative to ensure that local leaders
and practitioners are aware of the timetable and any changes to it
htp:/wwwgovugovenment/pubications/areasendframework-and-handbook/area-sendinspections-framework-and-handbook
28/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
99. The inspection team will meet during week 2 to discuss the plan for the
inspection and any matters arising from their off-site analysis.
Weeks 2 and 3: meetings with children, young people,
parents and carers and practitioners
Tracking meetings with children, young people, parents and carers
100. Inspectors will use tracking meetings to gather evidence of the impact
of the local area partnership's strategy and commissioning on individual
children and young people with SEND. Tracking meetings enable inspectors
to understand specific children and young people's experiences and
journeys through the SEND system. Inspectors will look at the impact of the
local area partnership's SEND arrangements on the experiences and
outcomes of children and young people, including how decisions have been
made, how children, young people and their families have been involved
and whether they have received the right help at the right time. Tracking
meetings will help inspectors to identify lines of enquiry they wish to review
through the range of inspection activities.
101. Inspectors will discuss the child or young person's experiences with
them. Inspectors will ask the LANO and ICB representative to work with
practitioners and families so as to understand how inspectors can best
support the child or young person to share their experiences. Inspectors
may also discuss children and young people's experiences with their
parents and/or carers, either together with or separately from their child,
depending on the age of the child or young person and the family's
preferences.
Tracking meetings with practitioners
102. Inspectors will have a multi-agency tracking meeting with the child or
young person's health, social care and education professionals, and any
other practitioners involved. Where relevant, this may include providers of
commissioned services (for example, practitioners working directly with the
child or young person at their children's home or through children and
young people's mental health services) or other services that may be
relevant to understanding the child or young person's experience. The lead
inspector will ask the LANO and ICB representative to ensure that the
practitioners involved in the meeting include any staff who coordinate the
child or young person's overall plan of support, or who have the greatest
awareness of it and know the child. Leaders and/or practitioners may
always be accompanied by a colleague of their choice when speaking to
inspectors if they wish. However, it is important that they can express their
views freely to inspectors.
hp:/wwwougovenmet/ubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook
29/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
103. Inspectors may discuss children and young people's records with
practitioners, using their knowledge of the child or young person, file
structure and recording systems. They may also consider any case
supervision notes. Where children and young peoples' case records are
held wholly or partly electronically, the service should arrange for identified
inspectors to have secure access to the electronic system. This activity will
be carried out in line with Ofsted's privacy notice
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ofsted-privacy-notices/social-care-
ofsted-privacy-notice#local-area-send-inspections) and CQC's privacy notice
(https://www.cqc.org.uk/about-us/our-policies/privacy-statement).
104. Inspectors will base their findings on contemporary practice that has an
impact on the child or young person's current situation. However, they will
also review some historical information to understand the child or young
person's journey.
Discussions with children and young people
105. Inspectors will also meet with children and young people during week 2
of the inspection. Inspectors may also arrange to contact or meet with
additional children and young people to discuss relevant lines of enquiry,
discuss their individual experiences or seek their views on a specific aspect
of the local area's arrangements throughout the inspection, including during
sampling and focusing visits. These discussions will support the inspectors
to:
understand the experiences and outcomes of the child or young person
understand how the local area partnership engages with children and
young people, and the impact this engagement has
identify any common themes that will contribute to lines of enquiry for the
inspection
discuss their views on effective practice and how the local area
partnership could improve its arrangements for children and young
people with SEND
Discussions with parents and carers
106. Inspectors will contact or meet with parents and carers during the
inspection to:
understand the impact on their child of the local area's SEND
arrangements
understand the impact on the wider family
identify effective practice and how arrangements could be improved
gain more information about specific lines of enquiry
Discussions with parent and carer representative groups
https:/wwwgovukgovemet/pubications/areasendframework-and-handbook/area-sendinspections-framework-and-handbook
30/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
107. Inspectors will meet remotely with representatives from the parent
carer forum and/or other representative groups of parents and carers in
week 2 of the inspection. Lead inspectors may contact the local area
partnership, the DfE and regional NHS England (NHSE) officials before the
inspection to agree which relevant representative groups inspectors will
contact. This is to:
identify any common themes that contribute to developing lines of enquiry
for the inspection
discuss their views on effective practice and how the local area
partnership could improve its arrangements for children and young
people with SEND
Week 3: focused sampling of decision-making and
oversight
108. Inspectors will evaluate the decision-making processes and oversight,
including those related to legal duties, for specific groups of children and
young people with SEND, by sampling from these groups with officers from
the local area partnership.
109. Inspectors will ask to discuss a selection of children and young
people's experiences with one or two officers who know the child and are
directly involved in the decision-making and oversight of their support.
Leaders and/or practitioners may always be accompanied by a colleague of
their choice when speaking to inspectors if they wish. However, it is
important that they can express their views freely to inspectors.
110. Inspectors will choose which children and young people they want to
discuss. They may do this before the meeting, using the information
provided by the local area partnership. Alternatively, they will ask the officers
to show them records based on certain criteria, and will choose the children
and young people with officers during the meeting.
111. Topics that may be a subject for focused sampling include the decision-
making and oversight of the quality of EHC plans, fair access protocols, and
use of the dynamic support register. Inspectors may also use focused
sampling to review the local area partnership's oversight of particular
groups of children and young people with SEND, for example those who
have high rates of absence from school, are EOTAS, are known to the
youth justice service, are not on a school roll or are home educated.
112. Inspectors may ask to speak to children, young people and/or their
families who have been identified during a focused sampling exercise.
https:/wwwgov.u/govenment/pubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolk
31/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
Week 3: sampling visits to providers and services
113. Inspectors will visit a number of providers and services across
education, health and social care to review the experiences of a wider group
of children and young people, in line with their specific lines of enquiry.
These visits are not to directly inspect the quality of provision, as these
providers are subject to other inspection arrangements. Leaders and/or
practitioners may always be accompanied by a colleague of their choice
when speaking to inspectors if they wish. However, it is important that they
can express their views freely to inspectors.
114. These sampling visits enable inspectors to review the impact of the
local area partnership's arrangements on a larger group of children and
young people with SEND. Inspectors will evaluate children and young
people's experiences and outcomes by reviewing documents and talking to
practitioners.
115. Ofsted and CQC will select providers and services to visit, and will
discuss their suitability with the LANO and the ICB representative. The lead
inspector will provide the LANO with notification letters to send to the
chosen education, health and care providers. The LANO will set up the
visits and arrangements for case sampling.
116. During sampling visits, inspectors will visit a specific provider or service
and ask for information about individual children and young people's
experiences. These may include children and young people who have a
specific need, who are receiving a specific service and/or who are at a
particular point in their education with a range of health and care needs.
117. Inspectors will choose the children and young people. They may do
this before the visit, using the information provided by the local area
partnership. Alternatively, they will ask practitioners to show them records
based on certain criteria established from the lines of enquiry, and will
choose the children with practitioners during the visit.
118. Inspectors will look at any documents relating to the children and
young people, and will discuss their experiences and outcomes with the
practitioners in that provision or service. Inspectors may also look at case
supervision notes. Where case records are held wholly or partly
electronically, the provider should arrange for the inspectors to have secure
access to the electronic system.
119. Inspectors sampling in education settings will include children and
young people receiving SEN support. This may include meeting children
and young people and, if appropriate, reviewing files and talking to
practitioners. These visits may include early years settings, schools,
htt:/wwugovemen/ucaton/area-sendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbookt
32/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
colleges, alternative provision and specialist services. The scope of the
inspection covers children and young people who live in the local authority
area, including those educated out of area. However, it does not cover
those who live in other areas but attend an education setting within the local
authority's boundaries.
120. Inspectors sampling in health providers and services will gather
evidence of the assessment, intervention and transition stages of health
support. These visits will include universal, targeted and specialist health
teams, such as speech and language therapy services and children and
young people's mental health teams.
121. Inspectors sampling in social care will consider the identification,
assessment, intervention and transition stages of social care support. This
may include visits to services such as the disabled children's team, early
help services and adult social care teams.
122. Findings will be based on contemporary practice, and on practice that
has an impact on the child or young person's current situation. However,
they will also review some historical information to understand the child or
young person's journey.
123. Inspectors may ask to speak to children, young people and/or their
families during the sampling visit.
Week 3: inspection team meetings
124. The inspection team will meet at different points during the 5 on-site
days, and remotely during the 2 working days before being on site. In
particular, the team should, as far as is practicable, meet each day to
discuss and record emerging findings and ensure that the lead inspector
has the most recent evaluative information to feed back to the LANO and
the ICB representative.
125. During the final team meeting, inspectors will summarise the key
evidence and share final evaluative outcomes. The main points for feedback
to the local area partners will be recorded as the meeting progresses,
including the overall inspection outcome, strengths, recommendations for
improvement and any areas for priority action.
Week 2 and 3: meetings with leaders
Initial meeting with leaders
htt://wwwu/goverment/pubicatons/area-sendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook
33/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
126. The lead inspector and CQC inspector should meet with the LANO,
ICB representative and other colleagues, as agreed by the lead inspector
and the LANO and the ICB representative, before on-site activity begins.
127. At this first meeting, the LANO, ICB representative and other
colleagues will share information on the local area partnership's context.
Meeting to discuss the local area partnership's self-evaluation and
strategic planning
128. The lead inspector, the LANO and ICB representative will arrange a
meeting with leaders on the first day on site, to review the local area
partnership's self-evaluation, strategy and associated action plans.
129. This meeting should include the following people:
the DCS and elected member with specific responsibilities for SEND
the LANO
the ICB representative
representatives of the parent carer forum
senior managers responsible for the strategic development and
operational management of education, health and social care provision
for children and young people with SEND; this may include the
designated clinical officer and/or the community health provider strategic
lead
senior local authority manager responsible for the commissioning and
oversight of alternative provision
a colleague chosen by the DCS, the ICB representative or the LANO, if
they wish, such as another senior leader who typically deputises for them
and can understand and discuss the content of the meeting (optional)
Keep-in-touch meetings
130. At the heart of our inspections is a professional dialogue between
inspectors and leaders. The lead inspector will establish keep-in-touch
meetings at key points during the inspection. This will enable the inspection
team to feed back to the DCS, the ICB representative and the LANO on
findings from inspection activity, any emerging lines of enquiry, identify any
additional evidence required, answer any questions and make changes to
the timetable if necessary. The DCS, the ICB representative and the LANO
may always be accompanied by a colleague of their choice, if they wish,
such as another senior leader who typically deputises for them and can
understand and discuss the content of the meetings.
131. The local area partnership is responsible for providing evidence of the
impact of its arrangements for children and young people with SEND. This
includes the local area partnership providing appropriate information and
data, such as any analysis of the experiences and outcomes of children and
http:/wwwvuk/govemet/pubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook.
34/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
young people with SEND in its local area. It also includes opportunities to
meet relevant managers and other local area representatives.
132. The local authority is responsible for providing evidence of its
arrangements for commissioning and overseeing alternative provision for
children and young people in its area.
133. Inspectors may also work with the LANO and the ICB representative to
arrange additional meetings with leaders and/or practitioners throughout the
on-site inspection. This will enable inspectors to discuss specific lines of
enquiry or information that they have gathered through tracking meetings or
sampling visits. Leaders and/or practitioners may always be accompanied
by a colleague of their choice when speaking to inspectors if they wish.
However, it is important that they can express their views freely to
inspectors.
The final feedback meeting
134. The inspection concludes with a final feedback meeting attended by
representatives from the local area, and the DfE and regional NHSE
officials. Attendance is voluntary and any attendee may leave at any time,
including leaving for a short time and then returning. If the feedback is likely
to be challenging or is likely to raise difficult issues, the lead inspector will
be sensitive to any implications arising from this. The lead inspector will
liaise with the DCS and the ICB representative, through the LANO, to agree
who attends this meeting. However, we expect the attendees to include:
the chief executive officer or leader of the council
the DCS and elected member with responsibility for SEND from the local
authority
the LANO
the ICB representative
the parent carer forum representatives
a colleague that the DCS, chief executive officer or council leader, the
ICB representative and the LANO has chosen to accompany them
(optional)
DfE and regional NHSE officials who are the primary contacts for the
local area
135. During the final feedback meeting, the lead inspector will ensure that
all attendees are clear:
about inspectors' evaluation of the local area partnership's effectiveness
in improving the experiences and outcomes of children and young people
with SEND
htp:/wwwgov.ugovenmet/pubications/area-send-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolk
35/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
about the inspection outcome and resulting time frame for the next
inspection activity
about any areas of widespread and/or systemic failings identified as
areas for priority action that will result in the requirement for a priority
action plan (area SEND) and in further monitoring
that any safeguarding concerns identified during the inspection have
already been fed back to senior leaders and/or acted on
that all feedback remains confidential to those present at the meeting,
until the local area receives their final report
that, on receiving the draft report, the local area partnership must ensure
that the report remains restricted and confidential to the relevant
personnel and should not be shared more widely or published. Leaders
may share inspection outcomes, in confidence, with others, provided the
information is not made public. This may include leaders' colleagues,
family members, medical advisers and/or their wider support group
that, in addition to being able to raise concerns at any stage during the
inspection, the local area partnership has an opportunity to raise any
issues or concerns or to seek clarification about the inspection, and can
also contact Ofsted after the end of the inspection, if needed
After the inspection
Arrangements for publishing the report
136. The lead inspector is responsible for writing the inspection report, with
contributions from the full inspection team across education, health and
care, and submitting the evidence shortly after the inspection ends. Findings
and inspection outcomes are reached jointly by the inspection team and the
report is published by both Ofsted and CQC.
137. The text of the report should explain the outcomes and reflect the
evidence. The findings should be consistent with the feedback given to the
local area at the end of the inspection, but are likely to be a succinct
account.
138. Inspection reports will be quality assured before we send a draft to the
local area. In most circumstances, the local area will receive the draft report
within 14 working days of the end of the inspection. The draft report is
restricted and confidential to the relevant personnel, and should not be
shared more widely or published.
139. The local area will have 10 working days to comment on the draft
report. The local area can highlight minor points relating to the clarity and/or
factual accuracy of the report, or it can submit a formal complaint seeking a
http://wwwovukgovemet/pubicaions/areasendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolk
36/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
review of the inspection process, including the judgement made or concerns
about inspector conduct (see paragraph 140). If it only submits minor points
of clarity or factual accuracy, we will respond to these when we share the
final report with the local area. This will normally be within 30 working days
of the end of the inspection.
140. If the local area wishes to make a formal complaint, we will follow the
process set out in our published Ofsted complaints procedure
(https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted/about/complaints-procedure)
or CQC complaints procedure (https://www.cqc.org.uk/contact-us/how-
complain/complain-about-service-or-provider). We will respond to any complaint
before we finalise and send the report to the local area. If the local area has
previously chosen to highlight some minor points of clarity or factual
accuracy on the draft inspection report (see paragraph 139), it will not
normally be able to submit a formal complaint or challenge later. We will
normally publish the report on our reports website
(https://reports.ofsted.gov.uk/) 5 working days after sending it to the local area.
141. Once a local area has received its final report, relevant recipients of
the report are required to publish it on their organisation's website and
supply a copy to a member of the public, on demand, for a reasonable
charge.
[footnote
7]
The local area partnership should ensure that the parent
carer forum receives a copy of the report.
142. As required by The Children Act 2004 (Joint Area Reviews)
Regulations 2015, Ofsted and CQC will disseminate the report to:
the Secretary of State for Education
the Secretary of State for Health and Social Care
the local authority for the area inspected
the principal authority that is responsible for making the action plan, if
HMCI has determined that the principal authority is different from the local
authority
any other people or organisations HMCI considers appropriate for the
nature of the inspection
143. In all cases, the inspection process should not be regarded as
complete until all inspection activity has been carried out and the final
version of the inspection report has been sent to the local area.
144. The evidence base for the inspection must be retained in line with
Ofsted's retention and disposal policy. We may decide that retaining it for
longer is warranted for research purposes. The evidence base for CQC will
also be retained in line with CQC's retention and disposal policy.
:ww.vmtubicatos/reasen-framework-and-handbook/area-sendinspections-framework-and-handbook.
37/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
Requirement for local area partnerships to produce a
priority action plan (area SEND)
145. If the inspection finds that there are widespread and/or systemic
failings leading to significant concerns about the experiences and outcomes
of children and young people with SEND, then the local area partnership is
required to develop and publish a priority action plan (area SEND).
146. The inspection report will name the principal authority responsible for
making the priority action plan. The principal authority may be the local area
partnership as a whole or one particular partner. The DfE and regional
NHSE will work with local area partnership officials to offer support and
challenge when they are developing a priority action plan.
147. The principal authority should aim to submit the priority action plan
(area SEND) to the DfE and regional NHSE within 35 working days from the
date that the local area partnership receives the final report. The DfE and
regional NHSE then review whether the priority action plan (area SEND)
meets the criteria outlined in paragraph 148.
148. The priority action plan (area SEND) must include:
the local area partnership's proposed measures to address the areas for
priority action identified in the inspection report
the responsible partner for each proposed action
the period within which the action is to be taken
149. Following feedback on the priority action plan (area SEND), the DfE,
regional NHSE, Ofsted and CQC ask that the principal authority, and any
other local area partners who were involved in making the priority action
plan (area SEND), should aim to publish the plan, as a section within their
updated strategic plan, within 50 working days from the date that the local
area partnership receives their final report. The principal authority must
supply a copy to a member of the public on demand (a reasonable charge
may be specified for this) and share a copy with Ofsted and CQC.
Request for local area partnerships to update their
strategic plans
150. We ask all local area partnerships to update and publish their strategic
plans after a full inspection. The plan should include the action the
https://wwwgovuk/goverment/pubicaion/area-sendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolt
38/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
partnership is taking, or will take, in response to the recommendations
made in the inspection report. This strategic plan should set out the local
area partnership's SEND strategy and how the local area partnership will
deliver the strategy. Local area partnerships may update existing plans or
choose to produce new plans.
151. Local area partnerships should aim to update their strategic plans
within 50 working days from the date they received their final report. They
should follow the recommendations in the inspection report, and are
expected to engage with all partners and stakeholders when deciding what
actions they need to take.
152. All strategic plans and priority action plans (area SEND), including
those produced as described in paragraphs 145 to 150
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-framework-and-
handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook#priority-action-plan),
should be published in a way which ensures that they are accessible to
children and young people with SEND, and their parents and carers.
Quality assurance and complaints
Quality assurance
153. All inspectors are responsible for the quality of their work. The lead
inspector must ensure that inspections are carried out in accordance with
the principles of inspection and the Ofsted code of conduct
(https://www.gov.uk/guidance/conduct-during-ofsted-inspections).
154. We monitor the quality of inspections through a range of formal
processes, and HMI/senior HMI and Children's Services Inspectors from
CQC may be on site in some local areas, or may monitor remotely, to
quality assure inspections. We may also evaluate the quality of an
inspection evidence base. The lead inspector will be responsible for giving
Ofsted team inspectors feedback on the quality of their work and their
conduct. The CQC lead inspector will be responsible for giving CQC team
inspectors feedback on the quality of their work and their conduct. In very
rare circumstances, if we find a weakness in the inspection process, we
may carry out a further visit to gather additional evidence
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/gathering-additional-evidence-to-
secure-an-incomplete-inspection).
155. Additionally, quality assurance inspectors from CQC may either join
inspectors on site or provide off-site quality assurance of area SEND
inspection activity.
156. All local areas are invited to take part in a voluntary post-inspection
survey in order to contribute to our ongoing improvement of our inspection
https://wwwvuk/goverment/pubications/areasendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolk
39/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
work. The link to this survey is provided when the local area receives the
final copy of its inspection report.
Handling concerns and complaints
157. The great majority of our work is carried out smoothly and without
incident. If concerns do arise during the inspection, they should be raised
with the lead inspector as soon as possible, in order to resolve issues
before the inspection is completed. Any concerns raised, and actions taken,
will be recorded in the inspection evidence. If there is any concern that is
not possible to resolve with the lead inspector during the inspection, the
local area partnership can contact a senior Ofsted leader using the number
provided during the notification process. In exceptional circumstances, this
might lead to the inspection being paused (see published guidance on
pausing inspections (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/pausing-state-funded-school-
inspections)).
158. If an issue remains unresolved, the local area partnership can contact
Ofsted after the end of the inspection. This will be an opportunity for the
local area partnership to raise informal concerns about the inspection
process or outcomes, ask about next steps or highlight information that they
feel was not fully considered during the inspection. This will be directed to
an inspector who is independent of the inspection, to discuss and to
resolve, where appropriate, at the earliest opportunity.
159. If it is not possible to resolve concerns during the inspection or through
a telephone call after the inspection, the local area partnership may wish to
lodge a formal complaint when it receives the draft report. The lead
inspector will ensure that the local area partnership is informed that it is able
to make a formal complaint, and that information about how to complain
(https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted/about/complaints-procedure)
is available on GOV.UK.
Part 3: Monitoring inspections
160. Ofsted and CQC will carry out monitoring inspections in local areas
that were found, at a full inspection, to have widespread and/or systemic
failings and were required to produce a priority action plan (area SEND).
Monitoring inspections will be carried out around 18 months from the date
when the local area partnership received its final report following the full
inspection.
161. The purpose of the monitoring inspection is to assess the extent to
which the local area partnership is taking effective action to address the
areas for priority action set out in the inspection report. Inspectors will tailor
their enquiries and evidence-gathering to focus on the areas for priority
:/ww./govenmet/ubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook.
40/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
action that were identified at the full inspection. If inspectors identify any
new, widespread and/or systemic failings during the monitoring inspection,
the monitoring inspection outcome letter will refer to these.
162. The monitoring inspection will always be led by an Ofsted HMI,
accompanied by a Children's Services Inspector from CQC. The team will
normally be made up of inspectors from education, health and social care.
163. Ofsted and CQC may vary the composition and size of the inspection
team. We base this decision on several factors, including the complexity of
the areas for priority action, and the size and nature of the geographical
area covered by the ICB.
164. Inspectors will carry out activities that are similar to those carried out
during full inspections. These include, but are not limited to, discussions
with leaders; sampling children and young people's experiences during
visits to education, health and social care providers; and holding meetings
with children and young people, parents and carers, practitioners and
leaders.
165. Inspectors will take account of:
any action taken by leaders, since the initial inspection, to address the
areas for priority action
evidence provided by the local area partnership that shows how leaders
have assured themselves that the necessary action is being taken for
children and young people against each area of priority action
any self-evaluation carried out by the local area partnership
the views of children and young people and their parents and carers,
gathered through inspection activity such as sampling activities, and
discussions with children and young people with SEND
166. Ofsted and CQC retain the discretion to carry out a monitoring
inspection in any local area if information held, or received, by Ofsted and/or
CQC raises sufficient concern about the effectiveness of arrangements for
children and young people with SEND and their families. This may be
carried out in a local area that was not previously required to produce a
priority action plan (area SEND). In such cases, inspectors will gather
evidence that is relevant to the issues that gave rise to the decision to
inspect.
Arrangements for monitoring inspections
Weeks 1 and 2: notification, set-up and information request
htt://wwwugoverment/ubicatons/area-send-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook
41/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
167. The process for notifying the local area is the same as for full
inspections (see paragraph 84
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-framework-and-
handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook#notification). On the
same day as the notification to the local area, the lead inspector will also
notify the parent carer forum or other parents' groups involved in the priority
action plan (area SEND), if known. The Ofsted lead inspector will handle
any deferral requests, as set out in paragraph 86
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-framework-and-
handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook#deferrals).
Set-up discussion
168. Following notification, the Ofsted lead inspector and CQC inspector will
contact the LANO and the ICB representative. The inspectors will
encourage the LANO and the ICB representative to have someone present
during the call to assist and support them if they wish. This should be at
least one other senior leader who typically deputises for them and can
understand and discuss the content of the call. The purpose of this call is to:
check on the leaders' well-being and whether any issues or concerns
need to be addressed, including to make sure appropriate support is
available. The lead inspector should establish how to contact whoever is
responsible for the leaders' well-being on a day-to-day basis, so that they
can pass on well-being concerns if appropriate and necessary
to arrange for any relevant up-to-date information to be made available to
inspectors before the on-site week; this will include the current version of
the priority action plan (area SEND) and the local area's strategic plan
discuss the arrangements for the inspection, including the timetable of
activities; arrangements for talking to children, young people and their
families; the key officers and representatives to involve in specific
meetings; and arrangements for giving regular feedback and discussing
the emerging findings of the inspection
discuss the information requested for the inspection (Annex A
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-framework-and-
handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook#annex-A))
ask that the key stakeholders involved in arrangements for children and
young people with SEND and the commissioning of alternative provision
are made aware of the inspections, including providers, services, parents
and carers
provide an opportunity for leaders to raise any issues or concerns, or to
seek clarification before the inspection, and explain how the local area
partnership will be able to raise any matters during the inspection itself
provide an opportunity for leaders to discuss and/or give inspectors
information on potential equality duties, including reasonable adjustments
for individuals
p:/wwwov.govenmet/ubicatios/areasendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbookt
42/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
169. The local area partnership is responsible for providing the monitoring
inspection team with any relevant data/information. Any data requested
must only be what the local area partnership produces as part of its routine
work or as set out in Annex A. The inspection team will tell the partnership
what data they require from Annex A. We do not expect the inspection team
to require all of the data set out in Annex A but only data relevant to the
areas for priority action that were set out in the full inspection report. We do
not expect the local area partnership to provide any data or information in a
particular format.
170. The local area partners should provide evidence to show how they
have assured themselves that they are addressing the areas for priority
action that were identified in the full inspection report. Evidence should
include how the local area partnership has involved children and young
people with SEND and their families in their actions. This should include
how the partnership has ensured that the voices, experiences and
outcomes of children and young people with SEND remain a focus of its
actions.
171. Inspectors will review the uploaded evidence and arrange a telephone
call with the LANO and the ICB representative. This will be to discuss the
schedule for the monitoring inspection, including the evidence-gathering
activities deemed appropriate by the inspection team to explore what the
local area partnership is doing to address identified areas for priority action.
They will also discuss other practical arrangements, such as who should
attend meetings.
172. The lead inspector and CQC inspector will also hold a discussion with
the officials from the DfE and regional NHSE about any support they have
given the local area partnership to address the areas for priority action. All
discussions must be recorded in the evidence base.
Inspectors will meet remotely with representatives from the parent carer
forum and/or, when appropriate, another representative group of parents
and carers at the start of the inspection. This is to:
establish their views on whether the local area partnership has taken
effective action to address the areas for priority action
understand how parent/carer groups have been involved in the
developments and in monitoring the priority action plan
Inspectors may also meet with representative groups of children and young
people to understand how the local area partnership has engaged with them
in addressing the areas for priority action.
p:/wwwgvenmet/ubicaos/areasendframework-and-handbook/area-sendinspections-framework-and-handbook
43/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
The on-site week
173. Typically, inspectors will spend a minimum of 2.5 days on site, although
this may vary depending on the circumstances of the local area. Inspectors
and local areas will discuss and agree on the precise timing of activities.
174. Inspectors will focus their enquiries and evidence-gathering activities
on the areas for priority action that were identified in the full inspection.
Activities may include, but are not limited to, meetings with leaders from the
local area partnership, sampling the experiences of children and young
people, visits to settings/provision and discussions with children and young
people with SEND, their families and practitioners.
Discussions with children and young people with SEND and their
families
175. Inspectors may arrange to meet with children and young people with
SEND and their families during the inspection. This is to discuss their
individual experiences or to ask for their views on a specific aspect of the
local area's arrangements and the action it has taken to address the areas
for priority action.
Feedback to leaders
176. On the final day of the monitoring inspection, the inspection team will
provide feedback to leaders on whether they have taken effective action to
address the areas for priority action in the full inspection report. Attendance
is voluntary, and any attendee may leave at any time, including leaving for a
short time and then returning. If the feedback is likely to be challenging or is
likely to raise difficult issues, the lead inspector will be sensitive to any
implications of this. The attendees at this feedback meeting will be agreed
between the Ofsted lead inspector, CQC inspector, the LANO and the ICB
representative. However, we expect them to include:
the chief executive officer or leader of the council
the DCS and elected member with responsibility for SEND from the local
authority
the LANO
the ICB representative
the parent carer forum representatives
http/wwovgvenmet/ublication/area-send-framework-and-andbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbool
44/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
a colleague chosen by the DCS, chief executive officer or council leader,
the LANO and the ICB representative to accompany them (optional)
DfE and regional NHSE officials who are the primary contacts for the
local area
Approach to outcomes
177. Inspectors will evaluate whether the local area partnership is taking
effective action against each area for priority action set out in the full
inspection report. When deciding on the outcomes, inspectors will consider
the relevant evaluation criteria, as set out in paragraphs 48 to 61, that relate
to each area for priority action.
Effective action
Inspectors will reach this outcome if, having gathered and evaluated
evidence, they find that the local area partnership has taken reasonable
steps to address the area for priority action since the full inspection, based
on the relevant evaluation criteria.
Effective action does not mean that the area for priority action is no longer a
concern or that the local area can stop taking action to address it.
Inspections are a point-in-time evaluation. Areas for priority action that
receive an effective action outcome may still be identified as areas for
priority action in future inspections. This can happen if the local area has not
continued to take action and/or the action has not continued to have a
positive impact on the experiences and outcomes for children and young
people with SEND.
Ineffective action
Inspectors will reach this outcome if, having gathered and evaluated
evidence, they find that the local area partnership has not taken reasonable
steps to address the area for priority action since the full inspection based
on the relevant evaluation criteria.
An ineffective action outcome means that the area for priority action is still a
significant concern and that the local area partnership needs to take further
and/or different action.
Each outcome will be accompanied by a short summary of the inspectors'
evaluation of the action the local area partnership has taken to address the
area for priority action.
The monitoring inspection letter
178. The lead inspector is responsible for writing the monitoring inspection
outcome letter and submitting the evidence to Ofsted shortly after the end of
https://wwwvuk/goverment/pubications/areasendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolk
45/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
the monitoring inspection. The CQC inspector and any Ofsted team
inspectors will contribute to the process of drafting the letter.
179. The letter will include:
the findings on whether the local area partnership has taken effective
action to address the areas for priority action identified at the full
inspection
a clear and brief summary of the evidence gathered during the inspection
clarification that inspection findings will be sent to the DfE and regional
NHSE, and may be used by them to determine further intervention and/or
support
180. As far as possible, and subject to the outcome of the quality assurance
process, the findings in the letter will be consistent with the feedback given
to the local area partners at the end of the inspection.
181. In cases where Ofsted and CQC have had reason to carry out a
monitoring inspection of a local area that was not previously required to
produce a priority action plan (area SEND) (see also paragraph 161), the
contents of the letter will directly address the issues that gave rise to the
decision to inspect. Inspectors may decide that the local area should
produce a priority action plan (area SEND) and/or that the next planned full
inspection should be brought forward.
Quality assurance and publication of the monitoring
inspection letter
182. Ofsted will publish the monitoring inspection letter on the local authority
section of Ofsted's reports website (https://reports.ofsted.gov.uk/). The final
letter will normally be shared with the local area partnership within 30
working days of the end of the monitoring inspection.
183. The process and arrangements for quality assuring and finalising the
monitoring inspection letter are the same as for inspection reports (please
refer to paragraphs 136 to 142
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-framework-and-
handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook#arrangements-for-
publishing)).
184. The process for ensuring the quality of monitoring inspections is the
same as that for full inspections, as set out in paragraphs 153 to 156
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-framework-and-
handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook#quality-assurance).
https:/wwwgovukgovemet/pubications/areasendframework-and-handbook/area-sendinspections-framework-and-handbook
46/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
After the monitoring inspection
185. Ofsted and CQC ask that the principal authority, and any other local
area partners who were involved in making the priority action plan (area
SEND), update the plan after the monitoring inspection.
186. Any complaints about monitoring inspections will be subject to the
same arrangements as for complaints about full inspections. Information
about this is set out in paragraphs 157 to 159
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-framework-and-
handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook#complaints).
187. Arrangements for securing, retaining and disposing of the evidence
base for monitoring inspections are the same as for full inspections, as
detailed in paragraph 144 (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-
send-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-
handbook#monitoring-inspections).
Part 4: Engagement meetings
188. Ofsted and CQC will invite local area partnerships to engagement
meetings, with at least 1 month's notice. These meetings do not have
evaluative outcomes but support collaboration by bringing education, health
and social care partners together, as well as keeping a spotlight on SEND
provision.
The engagement meeting will:
discuss the partnership's self-evaluation, SEND action plan or equivalent
document and how they measure the impact of their work on the
experiences and outcomes of children and young people with SEND and
their families
discuss any concerns or changes to the local SEND system and how
leaders are addressing them
What will be discussed at engagement meetings
189. During engagement meetings, Ofsted and CQC will explore how the
local area partnership monitors the impact of its arrangements for children
hp:/wwwougovenmet/ubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook
47/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
and young people with SEND. The meeting should last no longer than 2
hours.
The meeting will focus on:
the content of the self-evaluation, SEND action plan or equivalent
document
the action the local area leaders are taking to address the areas for
improvement and/or priority action set out in the full inspection report
what the local area partnership is doing to maintain or improve good
practice
how local area leaders are monitoring the impact of their actions
emerging local and/or national SEND issues that affect delivery of
services
a discussion about the current area SEND thematic topic, if appropriate
the approximate timing of the next engagement meeting
Self-evaluation in advance of engagement meetings
190. We will ask local area partnerships to provide us with any available
self-evaluation or similar documents at least 2 weeks before the
engagement meeting. This should set out:
what leaders know about children and young people's needs, aspirations,
experiences and outcomes in their area
how the local area partnership monitors the impact of its arrangements
for children and young people with SEND
191. There is no prescribed format or content for the self-evaluation, but it
should be succinct and reflect the local area partnership's routine business.
Ofsted must ensure that CQC representatives receive a copy.
192. Ofsted and CQC representatives should prepare for the meeting
having reviewed the self-evaluation, SEND action plan or similar document
and any local trends or key issues they consider relevant. For Ofsted, this
includes a review of regional intelligence about the experiences or children
and young people with SEND in the local area.
Timing and arrangements for engagement meetings
htt/wwwugoveme/ucaton/area-sendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handbook
48/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
193. The frequency and timing of engagement meetings will depend on the
outcome that the local area receives at their full inspection and any regional
intelligence received by Ofsted and CQC.
Local area partnerships whose arrangements typically lead to positive
experiences and outcomes for children and young people with SEND will
be invited to up to 2 engagement meetings before their next full
inspection.
Local area partnerships whose arrangements lead to inconsistent
experiences and outcomes for children and young people will be invited
to 1 engagement meeting before their next full inspection.
Local area partnerships whose arrangements are found to have
widespread and/or systemic failings will receive a monitoring inspection
usually within 18 months from the date they received their final report.
They may also be invited to an engagement meeting before their next full
inspection. This will usually take place after their monitoring inspection.
194. Local area partnerships who have not had a full inspection under the
new area SEND framework will continue to be invited to engagement
meetings until they have their full inspection.
195. Ofsted and CQC retain the right to invite local area partnerships to
further engagement meetings if they hold or receive any information that
raises a concern about the effectiveness of arrangements for children and
young people with SEND and their families.
Arrangements for the engagement meeting
196. Engagement meetings will take place at a mutually convenient time.
The Ofsted regional director may exercise their discretion about the timing
of the meeting, taking into account inspection outcomes and any recent
inspection activity or intelligence. The engagement meeting will usually take
place online. A regional representative from Ofsted will chair the discussion
and will be accompanied by a Children's Services Inspector from CQC. An
Ofsted regional representative will chair the meeting. A social care senior
HMI or HMI may also attend.
197. We expect the DCS, the ICB representative and parent carer forum
representatives to attend the engagement meeting. It is for the DCS and the
ICB representative to determine who else attends from the local authority
and the health teams. For the meeting to be effective, all attendees should
have a clear purpose for being there and be able to contribute to the
meeting.
After the engagement meeting
198. Ofsted and CQC will write a meeting note after the engagement
meeting and send this to the DCS and the ICB representative within a
month of the meeting taking place. The regional representative from Ofsted
will take the lead in writing the meeting note but must share it with the CQC
tp/wwgovgovenmet/ubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolk
49/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
representative before sending it to the local area partnership. The meeting
note will include:
the date of the meeting and who attended
a factual summary of the agenda items discussed
the approximate timing of the next engagement meeting
any next steps
199. The engagement meeting will not result in evaluative outcomes. The
meeting note will only be for Ofsted, CQC and the leaders of the local area
partnership to retain for their records. Ofsted and CQC will not publish the
meeting note. The local area partnership can decide whether it wants to
publish the meeting note. It may also wish to share the meeting note with
DfE and regional NHSE.
Annex A: information requested to
support inspections
200. This annex sets out the information that inspectors request when they
notify the local area partnership of an area SEND full inspection. It also sets
out the information that the inspectors will request to assist them in
selecting children and young people's cases for tracking, and the further
information they will request about those selected. Inspectors may request
some of the Annex A information for monitoring inspections. The table below
sets out the high-level timeline for sharing this information.
Day/time
Activity
Week 1,
Inspectors request the information set out in Annex A
Monday
Week 1,
Local area partnership provides person-level data to help
Tuesday,
inspectors to select children and young people to track
by 11am
Local area partnership provides requested information about
arrangements for commissioning SEND-related health
services: see the health commissioning template. Additional
information is in section 1.5 of the Information to be provided
by the local area partnership following notification table
Local area partnership provides information on
commissioning of residential special schools: see the
information on commissioning of residential special schools
/wwgvem/ubicas/areasendramework-and-handbook/area-send-nspections-framework-and-handbook
50/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
Day/time
Activity
template). Additional information is in section 3.2 of the
Information about education at the end of week 1 table
Week 1,
Inspectors select children and young people's cases to be
Tuesday,
tracked
by 5pm
Week 1,
Local area partnership provides additional information about
Friday, by
children and young people selected for tracking
5pm
Local area partnership provides additional information about
SEND arrangements
201. Inspectors will provide details for accessing an online system that the
local area partnership can use to share the information.
202. Inspectors will gather personal information, including some sensitive
personal data, that is necessary to help them evaluate local arrangements
for children and young people with SEND. Ofsted's privacy notice
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ofsted-privacy-notices) and CQC's
privacy notice https://www.cqc.org.uk/about-us/our-policies/privacy-statement) set
out what data we collect, what we do with it, how long we keep it for and
people's rights under the Data Protection Act 2018.
203. If information is shared that is relevant to more than one of the
requests, it does not need to be replicated in each section, but the lead
inspector should be made aware of it.
Week 1: person-level data
204. When the lead inspector contacts the local area partnership, they will
ask for lists containing person-level data. An outline of the broad contents of
each list is set out below. Detailed guidance about the fields for each list is
available in the person-level data guidance and template
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-framework-and-handbook).
Included in the spreadsheet is a template for each person-level list. Please
provide these links in Excel. The local area partnership should provide the
person-level data lists by 11am on the day after notification.
205. The inspectors will use this data to select the children and young
people whose experiences they will evaluate. The person-level data lists
should be as up to date as possible. However, if the most recent available
data is a historical snapshot, such as from the special educational needs
survey (SEN2) https://www.gov.uk/guidance/special-educational-needs-survey) or
https:/wwwgov.u/govenment/pubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolk
51/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
the alternative provision (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/alternative-provision-ap-
census) census, this will be acceptable.
List
Description
number
List 1
All children and young people with an EHC plan for whom your
local authority is responsible. Please see the 'Guidance' and
'FAQ' tabs in the person-level data guidance and template for
further information
List 2
All children and young people who are in receipt of SEN support
educated in settings within your local area. Please see the
'Guidance' and 'FAQ' tabs in the person-level data guidance and
template for further information
206. Where possible, we have aligned the information in the person-level
lists with DfE guidance on SEN2 and the school/alternative provision
census. The spreadsheet template includes an overview of the codes to
use, sourced from the SEN2 or school/alternative provision census
guidance.
207. The person-level data lists should represent the local area
partnership's most recent available data at the point of notification. When
the local area partnership shares the lists, they should indicate what date(s)
the data in each list represents as far as possible.
208. If certain data is unavailable, the lead inspector may wish to discuss
how the local area partnership monitors those areas.
209. In the future, we may request different information, but this will always
happen following engagement with local area partnerships.
210. If you have any queries after you have been notified that an inspection
is to take place, please contact the lead inspector.
Week 1: information about the local area partnership's
SEND arrangements
211. In the first week of inspection, the local area partnership should provide
the information set out below.
212. The local area partnership should not provide all of the information that
it holds on each subject. The inspectors will want only the local area
https://wwwvuk/govement/pubications/areasendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolk
52/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
partnership's best and most recent information that relates to the scope of
the inspection. Inspectors will not review information that they deem to fall
outside the scope of the inspection.
Information to be provided by the local area partnership following
notification
Number
Item
Description
1.1
Local area
The education, health and care partners
partnership
involved in the local area partnership; the
structure
governance arrangements, decision-
making structures, how partners work
together and who is responsible for
delivering what
1.2
Assessment of
Local area partnership's analysis of the
needs
local needs of SEND including the current
joint strategic needs assessment
1.3
Strategic planning
Planning strategies for children and young
people with SEND, including any self-
evaluations and action plans resulting
from internal and external reviews
1.4
Dynamic support
List of all children and young people aged
register
0 to 25 on the dynamic support register
1.5
Health system
The structure of the local health services,
overview and
which includes who commissions the
commissioning
service and who provides the service. This
arrangements
information must provided by 11am on the
day after notification. This proforma can
be used: Health commissioning template
Additional information to be provided by the local area
partnership at the end of week 1
Number
Item
Description
2.1
Approach to
The local area partnership's findings related to
EHC plans
the development, oversight and quality
assurance of EHC plans, including the services
53/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
Number
Item
Description
involved; and the assurance framework for EHC
plans, including findings from EHC plan audits
2.2
Tribunal
Analysis and learning from tribunal applications
appeals
and resolutions from the last 12 months
2.3
Information
The numbers of children and young people with
about specific
SEND who are: not attending an education
cohorts
setting, including those who receive home
education; attending alternative provision;
known to youth justice services; eligible to
receive adult care services; on part-time
timetables for their education
2.4
Outcome
The partnership's analysis of outcomes data on
measures
preparation for adulthood for children and young
people with SEND, including strengths,
challenges and actions taken
Information about education at the end of week 1
Number
Item
Description
3.1
Education
The structure of the local education system,
system
including the types of education setting, and
overview
which settings have specialist provision
available
3.2
Residential
Information about the commissioning and
special
oversight of placements of children and young
schools
people in residential special schools. This
proforma can be used: Residential special
school commissioning and provision
3.3
Out-of-area
Information about the commissioning and
placements
oversight of education settings outside the local
area that provide education for the area's
children and young people with EHC plans; data
on the number of children and young people
with SEND who are placed out of area, and the
reasons for this
https:/wwwgovuk/govement/pubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolt
54/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
Number
Item
Description
3.4
Alternative
Data about children and young people who
provision
have EHC plans, or are in alternative provision
on part-time timetables; this should include the
numbers of children and the length of time they
have been in alternative provision
3.5
Attendance
The most recent evaluation of educational
attendance of children and young people with
SEND in the local area and any supporting
action plan
3.6
Transport
Information about the strategy for transporting
children and young people with SEND to
provision, including activities, short breaks and
health appointments (where relevant)
3.7
Destinations
Data about destinations after leaving school,
and
including data about young people not in
employment
education, employment or training, and
employment data for 18- to 25-year-olds with
SEND
Information about care at the end of week 1
Number
Item
Description
4.1
Social care
Organisational structure showing lines of
services
reporting and accountability. Details of any
services in the area that have been
commissioned for children and young people
with SEND, including from the community, the
voluntary sector and the local offer
4.2
Short breaks
The local authority short-break statement, and
information on the current provision and
uptake
htt/wwugovemet/ubications/area-send-framework-and-handook/area-send-inspections-fameworkand-handboo)
55/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
Number
Item
Description
4.3
Thresholds,
The thresholds/criteria for providing services
assessments
and assessments for children and young
and provision
people with SEND, at different levels of need.
This should include information on services
for early help
4.4
ILACS lists
ILACS person-level data lists 6, 7, 8, 9 as
described in ILACS Annex A
4.5
Virtual schools
The annual report of the headteacher of the
virtual school and any other relevant plans
4.6
Transition and
The arrangements for transition for children
adult social care
and young people with SEND and how adult
social care services are provided to 18- to 25-
year-olds
Information about health at the end of week 1
Number Item
Description
5.1
Performance
Performance data from the previous 12 months
data
(including current waiting times) on delivery of:
the healthy child programme, therapy services
(including speech and language therapy;
occupational therapy; physiotherapy; newborn
hearing, audiology, dietetics, child and
adolescent community mental health services,
neurodiversity assessment and community
paediatricians) for children and young people
aged 0 to 19 years and 19 to 25, if available
5.2
Pathways
Pathways for referrals to health services for
assessment, as set out in 5.1
5.3
Recovery
Recovery action plans to support children and
action plans
young people who are waiting longer than the
recommended time frames for assessment,
diagnosis and treatment for the services
identified in 5.1
https://wwwvuk/goverment/pubication/area-sendframework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolt
56/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
Information from the local authority about alternative
provision at the end of week 1
Number
Item
Description
6.1
Strategy and
Information about the needs of children
commissioning
and young people in alternative provision
arrangements of
and the local authority's strategy and
alternative provision
commissioning arrangements for
alternative provision, including how they
monitor future need for placements and
maintain sufficient provision
6.2
Needs of children
Information about the needs of the
and young people
children and young people in the area
who are in alternative provision
6.3
Settings and
Information about the alternative provision
attendees
settings used by the local authority, and
the children or young people who attend
them, including whether these are part-
time placements
6.4
Monitoring and
A summary of the local authority's quality
oversight
assurance process for alternative
information
provision, including the relevant
framework
Week 1: selecting providers and settings for sampling
visits
213. The lead inspector will ask the LANO and ICB representative to identify
a list of providers and services where inspectors can sample the records of
individual children and young people. The inspection team will then select
the providers and services where it will carry out sampling, and will ask the
LANO to inform the providers and services.
http:/wwwovugovemet/ubications/areasend-ramework-and-handbook/areasend-inspections-framework-and-handbook
57/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
Week 1: additional information about children and
young people selected for tracking
214. The lead inspector will ask the LANO to coordinate the sharing of
information with the inspection team about the children and young people
who are being tracked. For each child or young person, this information will
include:
Number Item
Description
7.1
Pen portrait
A pen portrait of the child or young person,
including information about their needs,
aspirations and support
7.2
Multi-agency
A multi-agency chronology of the
audit
partnership's involvement with the child or
young person. This may include significant
events; any education, health and/or care
assessments, including an early help
assessment if applicable; any evaluation of
the impact of plans and support; and learning
for the providers and services involved in the
last 2 years
7.3
Plans
The most recent plans, including an EHC
plan, personal education plan or care plan,
where relevant
7.4
Discussion
Notes of any key multi-agency discussions or
notes
equivalent
7.5
Commissioning
The current commissioning agreement, when
agreements
the child or young person is in alternative
provision
1. Children Act 2004 (https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2004/31/section/20),
section 20.
2. 'Alternative provision: statutory guidance for local authorities'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/alternative-provision) Department
for Education, January 2013.
3. Health services for children and young people with SEND are provided
through acute and community services, and Mental Health Trusts and
http://wwwuk/goverment/pubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolk
58/59
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Area SEND inspections: framework and handbook - GOV.UK
other non-NHS providers. The majority of services are termed as
community services. These include speech and language therapy,
occupational therapy and physiotherapy, orthotics, community and
specialist nursing, and medical care and interventions. Children and
young people with SEND also use children and young people's mental
health services (community and inpatient) and may access health and
justice services and secure estates. Children and young people with
SEND may also need access to specialist equipment, wheelchairs,
continence supplies and assistive technology.
4. 'Alternative provision: statutory guidance for local authorities'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/alternative-provision) Department
for Education, January 2013.
5. 'Keeping children safe in education'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/keeping-children-safe-in-education-
-2), Department for Education, 2015.
6. 'Working together to safeguard children'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/working-together-to-safeguard-
children--2), Department for Education, 2018.
7. The Children Act 2004 (Joint Area Reviews) Regulations 2015
(https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2015/1792/regulation/3/made).
OGL
DIEUET
MONDROIT
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
© Crown copyright
htp:/wwgov.u/govenmet/pubications/areasend-framework-and-handbook/area-send-inspections-framework-and-handboolk
59/59
