NHS
England
Dynamic support register and
Care (Education) and Treatment
Review
Policy and guidance
January 2023
Document name: Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and
Treatment Review
Programme name: National Learning Disability and Autism Programme
Senior Responsible Owner: Tom Cahill, National Director,
Learning Disability & Autism Programme
Programme Lead:
Sue North, Head of Improving Quality, and
Phil Brayshaw, Acting Head of Children and
Young People
Version: 0.1
Date: January 2023
Publishing approval reference: PR1486
This document is available in easy read and can be provided in alternative formats
on request.
Equality and health inequalities statement
Promoting equality and addressing health inequalities are at the heart of NHS
England's values. Throughout the development of the policies and processes cited
in this document, we have:
Given due regard to the need to eliminate discrimination, harassment and
victimisation, to advance equality of opportunity, and to foster good relations
between people who share a relevant protected characteristic (as cited under the
Equality Act 2010) and those who do not share it; and
Given regard to the need to reduce inequalities between patients in access to,
and outcomes from healthcare services and to ensure services are provided in an
integrated way where this might reduce health inequalities.
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Contents
Forewords
6
1 Introduction
9
2 Policy
10
2.1 Policy statement
10
2.2 Policy aims
13
2.3 Policy scope
14
2.4 Consent
15
2.5 Information governance
Part A: Dynamic support registers
17
3 Core standards for dynamic support registers
18
3.1 Minimum requirements
19
3.2 Minimum dataset to be captured
20
4 Risk stratification
21
5 Self-referral
24
6 Consent for placement on the register
24
7 Data governance and information sharing
24
8 Transition planning
24
9 Partnership working
25
9.1 Care (Education) and Treatment Reviews
25
9.2 Keyworking
25
9.3 Housing
26
9.4 Personalised approach
26
9.5 Carer contingency planning
26
9.6 DSR information and advice
27
3
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Part B: Care (Education) and Treatment Reviews
28
10 Summary of key changes to the C(E)TR policy 2017
29
11 Principles
31
12 The C(E)TR panel
32
13 When are C(E)TRs triggered?
33
13.1 Trigger points
33
13.2 Requesting a C(E)TR sooner than the minimum timescales
36
14 Focus of each type of review
38
14.1 C(E)TRs - community
38
14.2 C(E)TRs - post-admission if no community C(E)TRs held
39
14.3 Review C(E)TRs - inpatient
39
14.4 People in long-term segregation - independent care
40
(education) and treatment reviews
14.5 Transfers from one hospital to another
41
14.6 When a diagnosis is given during an inpatient stay
41
14.7 When the removal of a diagnosis is being considered during
41
an inpatient stay
15 Access to specialised children and young people mental
42
health services (CYPMHS)
16 The review process
43
16.1 Sit and see
43
16.2 C(E)TRs and multidisciplinary team approach
43
16.3 Before the review
44
16.4 Who to invite to a review
46
16.5 How the review is conducted
49
16.6 Following the review
53
16.7 Key lines of enquiry responsibilities
54
16.8 Importance of advocacy
55
16.9 Importance of physical health
56
17 Leaving hospital: the discharge process and standards
57
18 Assurance and oversight: ICS oversight panels
58
4
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
19 CETR alignment with other assessment processes for children
60
and young people
20 Disagreements, escalation of concerns and complaints about
62
the C(E)TRs process
20.1 Concerns about lack of engagement from necessary
62
partners
20.2 Clinical disagreement
62
20.3 Disagreement about who is responsible for
62
providing care
20.4 Escalation of concerns
62
20.5 Complaints relating to the C(E)TR process
63
21 Roles and responsibilities - provider and commissioning
64
function
21.1 Provider collaboratives (provider function)
64
21.2 Provider collaboratives - NHS lead provider
64
(commissioning function)
21.3 NHS England regional teams
65
21.4 Local authorities (adults and children)
65
22 Glossary
66
Appendices
69
Appendix 1:
Factors that may place someone at risk of admission
70
to a mental health hospital
Appendix 2:
Cheshire and Wirral Partnership dynamic support
71
database clinical support tool - adult and child
Appendix 3:
C(E)TRs principles and standards
75
Appendix 4:
C(E)TRs - sit and see observation
79
Appendix 5:
C(E)TR advocacy entitlements
83
Appendix 6:
Safeguarding responsibilities in C(E)TRs
88
Appendix 7:
12-point discharge plan
90
Appendix 8:
Local area emergency protocol
92
Appendix 9:
Data to monitor C(E)TR pathway implementation
96
outcomes
Appendix 10: CTR policy - restricted patients
97
Appendix 11: Support for C(E)TR panel members and their
99
requirements
5
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Forewords
When the idea for the development of a care and
treatment review was discussed around eight years ago,
the driving force was to assist in unblocking apparent
barriers to discharging people with a learning disability
from hospital.
Over time it was also evident that a care and treatment review
could be very effective in helping to explore alternatives to
hospital admission when people were facing a crisis of care
Roger Banks,
and support in the community - particularly for children,
National Clinical
Director for Learning
hence their development into Care (Education) and Treatment
Disability and Autism,
Reviews (C(E)TRs). The content and delivery of C(E)TRs has
NHS England
undergone considerable evolution over time, responding to
increasing awareness of key issues to be addressed and how
they can be used to maximum effect.
This revision of the C(E)TR policy and its combination with the policy for dynamic
support registers (DSRs) are a strong reflection of an approach that does not see
either of these as existing in isolation. They are part of an integrated, whole system
approach to enabling greater and more focused awareness and empowerment
of people with a learning disability and autistic people who may require proactive
support, intervention and advocacy to maintain their health and wellbeing and
quality of life in the place where they live.
This approach will only succeed where there is a shared commitment across
organisations and key individuals to engaging with and supporting the highest
standards of practice and quality in the delivery of DSRs and C(E)TRs. I hope that this
revised and combined policy will direct and support such a commitment.
6
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
I've faced crisis in my life. I narrowly avoided hospitalisation
due to a lack of beds available rather than through
proactive, caring approaches by professionals, and
just because I avoided hospital does not mean things
immediately became better or that support was provided. I
was left alone, fending for myself for many more years.
These days I work for NHS England as an expert by experience on
projects such as this policy with the desire of ensuring no one faces
Conor Eldred-Earl,
the hardships of this world alone. I truly wish Care (Education) and
Expert by Experience
Advisor
Treatment Reviews (C(E)TRs) as defined in this policy had existed
when I was younger due to the difference they would have made
for me and others. Thankfully they are here now and will help
countless people, possibly even you reading this foreword.
This new combined policy has taken all the learning since the inception of the C(E)TRs
and dynamic support registers (DSRs) and has been reaffirmed through consultation
and engagement firmly steered by those with lived experience - be they individuals
with autism and/or a learning disability, their parents/carers or siblings. Given this lived
experience steer many of the changes made are focused on improving the experience
and quality of C(E)TRs for those receiving them, and marrying it up with the DSR policy
will ensure greater accountability and follow through in line with a commonly heard
frustration of inaction following a C(E)TR.
There are many changes - from improving the frequency of reviews to strengthening
the matching system, ensuring those who are diagnosed autistic and/or with a learning
disability during their time in hospital get a rapid C(E)TR and providing greater protection
to those who have their diagnosis challenged during admission.
I'm very excited that the new DSR policy will better enable local areas to identify and aid
those who need support to deliver it in a pre-emptive manner to avoid hospitalisation
unless absolutely necessary and then to ensure community involvement continues
throughout the admission to discharge and beyond.
Regardless of the direction someone's life takes, this policy allows for far greater oversight,
scrutiny and follow through, while keeping the individual, their family and all their needs
- be they physical or psychological - at the heart of it.
In summary this policy is for you. Having autism and/or a learning disability should never
be a limit to a fulfilling life. We will stand with you to ensure this; you are not alone.
7
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
I never expect my heart to soar with optimism when I'm
reading policy documents, but that's exactly what happened
when I read the dynamic support register (DSR) and Care
(Education) and Treatment Review policy and guidance.
For the past two years, I've been working with the DSR teams at
NHS England who were tasked with the design and development
of this new guidance. It's been heart-warming to see how much
thought and careful consideration has gone into getting this right.
Yvonne Newbold
At the heart of every decision has been the wellbeing of those it
MBE, Founder of
Newbold Hope, NHS
aims to help, and at every step along the way, they have consulted
Assembly Member,
and listened to both the autistic community and the learning
Mother
disability community, as well as their families.
I'm also a part of these communities, through my lived experience of parenting my non-
verbal, autistic son who has a profound intellectual disability, and through the work I do
with families of this cohort of children and young people who develop anxiety-led difficult
or dangerous behaviours.
For far too long, the most vulnerable members of my community have had a very raw
deal, made worse by both the lack of understanding and the lack of services able to offer
any meaningful support. A complete shift in attitude and approach is long overdue, and
this new policy and guidance could be that shift. It really has so much potential to create
a more hopeful future for so many children, young people and adults as well as for their
families. I'm particularly encouraged by the consistent themes throughout of both person-
centred decision-making and the importance of involving family members wherever
appropriate.
Reading through this policy has made me so proud of everyone who shared their
experiences and insights, both learnt and lived, because together we have developed a
framework that makes a real and significant difference.
However, no matter how well a policy is written, its success relies on how well it is
implemented at a local level. If you are reading this in your role as a decision-maker,
we are relying on you to do this well. Often it only takes one person with enough
commitment and care to really make a difference to someone's wellbeing. Please be that
person whenever you can. Thank you.
8
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
1. Introduction
Dynamic support registers (DSRs) and Care (Education) and Treatment Reviews
(C(E)TRs) are essential elements of the pathway providing people with a
learning disability and autistic people with appropriate support and care at
the right time - so that they can lead the lives they want to and meet their
ambitions and aspirations; and can stay safely and healthily in the community
or return to this as soon as possible.
This document provides policy and guidance on both, DSRs and C(E)TRs, for
implementation from 1 May 2023.
Building the Right Support (2015) and the NHS Long Term Plan (2019) set out what
autistic people and people with a learning disability should expect when they need
healthcare and support in the community. This includes specific intervention and support
for their mental health needs and at times of crisis or particular difficulty for them and
their family.
DSRs and C(E)TRs are central to the NHS Long Term Plan commitments by 2024 to:
reduce the number of children and adults with a learning disability and autistic
children and adults in mental health inpatient services
avoid inappropriate admissions to mental health inpatient settings
develop responsive, person-centred services in the community.
Early identification of people at risk of admission to a mental health hospital and their
access to person-centred planning and support are essential for the prevention of
avoidable admissions. If someone with a learning disability or an autistic person does
need to be admitted, this should be for the shortest time possible and during their stay
they should receive high standards of mental health and physical healthcare.
A key finding of the Norfolk Safeguarding Adults Board's review of the deaths of
Joanna, Jon and Ben at Cawston Park in Norfolk and the subsequent safe and
wellbeing reviews for all people with a learning disability and autistic people in hospital
was insufficient attention to people's physical healthcare in hospital and support for
meaningful activity and quality of life. Importantly, we have added a key line of enquiry
quality of life question and strengthened the focus on physical healthcare in this revised
C(E)TR policy; to support greater questioning and challenge around people's ability to
participate in activities and exercise and have an active, individualised programme of
care and support that promotes both their physical and mental wellbeing.
Note: Care and Treatment Reviews are intended for adults. Care, Education and
Treatment Reviews include an educational element and are intended for children and
young people. The term Care (Education) and Treatment Reviews (C(E)TR) is used when
both approaches are being referred to.
9
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
2. Policy
2.1 Policy statement
This policy sets out the expectations for the implementation and use of DSRs and
C(E)TRs across England. It is the responsibility of ICBs and their delegated directors to
ensure its implementation from 1 May 2023.
In revising this policy we have:
Considered the potential impact on people¹, including those with protected
characteristics under the Equality Act 2010, and given particular attention to cultural
sensitivities, health outcomes and the experiences of patients, communities and the
workforce.
Engaged and collaborated with people with lived experience, family carers, relevant
government departments, The Association of Directors of Children's Services,
Association of Directors of Adult Social Services, Local Government Association,
voluntary and community sector, and other strategic partners including those who
represent children, young people, adults and their families.
Made changes to align it with the new NHS commissioning landscape following the
creation of provider collaboratives, ICBs and integrated care systems (ICSs).
2.1.1 Dynamic support registers
Building the right support and the C(E)TR policy and guidance (2017) asked that local
health commissioners work with their local partners, including social care and education,
to develop and maintain a register of all people with a learning disability and autistic
people, including those considered to be at risk of admission to a mental health hospital.
This is now known as the dynamic support register (DSR).
ICBs should determine the geographical footprint a DSR should cover and whether it
should be held at local system level or with the ICB centrally.
This policy supports local systems to use DSRs most effectively; consistency of DSRs
across the country; and the sharing of DSR intelligence between care providers, social
services and education settings to best inform an individual's care. It serves as a guide
to professionals on their roles and describes the minimum standards that ensure these
registers effectively identify and include, with consent, appropriate children, young
people and adults (see section 3).
¹Throughout this policy the term 'people' refers to children, young people and adults who have a
learning disability, autistic people and those with both a learning disability and autism.
10
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
DSRs are the mechanism for local systems to:
use risk stratification to identify people at risk of admission to a mental health hospital
work together to review the needs of each person registered on the DSR
mobilise the right support (eg a C(E)TR, referral to a keyworker service for children and
young people, extra support at home) to help prevent the person being admitted to a
mental health hospital.
The DSR enables systems to identify adults, children and young people with increasing
and/or complex health and care needs who may require extra support, care and
treatment in the community as a safe and effective alternative to admission to a mental
health hospital. Additionally, they play a role in ensuring that people's needs are included
in commissioning plans, financial plans, service delivery and development.
See part A for detailed guidance.
2.1.2 Care (Education) and Treatment Reviews
C(E)TRs were developed as part of NHS England's commitment to improving the care of
people with a learning disability and autistic people in England. They were designed to
bring an additional challenge and scrutiny to existing health and care review processes,
an alternative perspective and expert insight.
For people at risk of admission or who are admitted to a mental health hospital, C(E)TRs
are an essential person-centred process. They seek to ensure system partners are working
with people and families to provide the right care, education and treatment to avoid the
need for an admission to a mental health hospital, and ensure good care for all.
When an admission is essential for the person to get the healthcare they need, C(E)TRs
provide the opportunity to check that their care and treatment are effective and that
they are supported to leave hospital as soon as possible.
While the NHS is responsible for implementing C(E)TRs, the involvement of local
authorities, education services and other partners, including housing and justice, in the
process and its outcomes is essential.
C(E)TRs bring together the individual, their family/carer and the organisations
responsible for commissioning and procuring services. This will include the responsible
health commissioner² from the provider collaborative, NHS England or ICS, consultants,
responsible clinicians, nurses, social workers, therapists, education commissioners
and providers, other health, education and social care professionals with independent
clinical opinion, and those with lived experience (people and families) from diverse
communities.
²The responsible commissioner in relation to a patient admitted to a hospital or registered
establishment is determined in accordance with NHS England's Who Pays? guidance.
11
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
All autistic children, young people or adults and those with a learning disability are
required to have a community C(E)TR if they have been admitted to or are considered to
be at risk of admission to a mental health hospital. If they do not have a community
C(E)TR they must have a post-admission C(E)TR within the required timescales - 28 days
for adults and 14 days for children and young people.
Review C(E)TRs must be undertaken in accordance with the guidance set out in part B.
We have added oversight processes for senior system-level review of C(E)TR
recommendations and progress for individuals who may hit certain thresholds. This is
based on learning from recent safe and wellbeing reviews (see section 16.9).
See part B for detailed guidance.
Figure 1: Example timeline of review processes for
a person admitted to a mental health hospital
Post
Added to
Community
admission MDT
DSR
C(E)TR
(check C(E)TR
recommendations)
MDT (check
Commissioner
6-week post
recommendations
oversight visit (sit
admission
from post-
and see) every
C(E)TR
admission CTR)
6 to 8 weeks
3 monthly C(E)TR
or 6 monthly
CTR
12
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
2.2 Policy aims
This policy supports the effective implementation of DSRs and C(E)TRs
in ICSs. It:
1. Supports effective use of DSRs to enhance the care of children, young people and
adults across local areas.
2. Supports the delivery of C(E)TRs for children, young people and adults in the
community and in mental health hospitals.
3. Ensures consistency in how DSRs are used and C(E)TRs undertaken across the
country so that people and their families/carers know what they can expect wherever
they live.
4. Empowers and supports people and their families to be listened to and to be equal
partners in their care and treatment pathway.
5. Prevents people being admitted to mental health hospitals where this is avoidable
through identifying community alternatives where appropriate.
6. Ensures that any admission is supported by a clear rationale for planned assessment
and treatment, together with defined and measurable intended outcomes.
7. Provides regular scheduled review of the care and treatment of and discharge plans
for people in mental health inpatient settings (or sooner by request where there is
dissatisfaction with progress).
8. Ensures that all agencies work together and with the person and their family to
support discharge into the community (or if the only option, to a less restrictive
setting) at the earliest opportunity.
9. Ensures the involvement of all relevant organisations, including where appropriate
children's social care, adult social care and the special educational needs (SEN) team,
school or college so that all relevant issues can be fully addressed and solutions
explored for the discharge of people into community-based settings or back home to
their families.
10. Supports a constructive and person-centred process of challenge to current and
future intended care and treatment plans where necessary.
11. Identifies barriers to progress and discharge, and makes recommendations for how
these could be overcome.
12. Results in an agreed action plan at the end of the C(E)TR that has clear actions, each
of which is allocated to a named individual together with a specific timescale.
13
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
13. Improves health outcomes through early access to the most appropriate services and
the provision of integrated and holistic care.
14. Enables people and their families to understand the process and have an opportunity
to be properly engaged.
The DSR guidance:
describes a framework that local areas must follow
sets out the minimum requirements for the use of a DSR in a local area; two relate
specifically to children and young people (see section 3)
sets out the minimum requirements for carrying out a DSR risk stratification - using a
common red, amber, green (RAG) rating system (see section 4).
Local systems must work with their key partners - these include people with lived
experience - to develop locally defined processes, pathways, criteria and roles
responsible for key elements of the process.
2.3 Policy scope
For DSRs, the policy relates to all children, young people and adults with a learning
disability and autistic children, young people and adults. As a minimum, those who are
at risk of admission to hospital must be included on a DSR (subject to their consent) and
inclusion on the register should be one of the triggers for a C(E)TR to happen.
For C(E)TRs, the policy relates specifically to children, young people and adults with
a learning disability and autistic children, young people and adults who are facing
potential admission to or are inpatients of any mental health hospital, and whose care
is being commissioned by NHS England, a mental health learning disability and autism
provider collaborative or an ICS.
The policy recognises that some people's route into a mental health hospital is through
the criminal justice system (through the courts or from prison or a young offender's
institution). They may be subject to a Ministry of Justice (MoJ) restriction order that
means they may have to serve a minimum sentence. The policy includes people subject
to MoJ restrictions once they have been admitted to hospital.
In these circumstances, although C(E)TRs cannot speed up the discharge process, they
can check that the individual is safe and getting appropriate and effective care and
treatment in the least restrictive setting based on their reason for admission to hospital
(rather than prison), and that planning is underway for their discharge.
14
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
2.4 Consent
A review cannot take place or a name added to a DSR without the person's
informed consent (see Shared decision making to comply with national
legislation and policy). Consent must be formally documented.
The date consent to inclusion on the DSR was obtained is part of the DSR minimum
dataset; consent should be checked at least annually and the dates it was checked
added.
The responsible ICS must ensure that consent has been sought from the person for both
the process and the information sharing that enables it. C(E)TRs take a person-centred
approach and this requires the sharing of personal and sometimes sensitive information.
The person must be supported to make a decision about consent by people who know
them well and understand their communication needs. Discussion should outline what
and how information will be shared about them and their care, as well as why (referred
to as fair processing). It should also highlight that information may need to be shared
more widely, such as in the event of any safeguarding concerns (see Appendix 6). This
discussion should be appropriately recorded, along with the decision.
The My C(E)TR Planner includes accessible information to help the individual understand
the nature and purpose of the review.
2.4.1 People who lack mental capacity
If the person lacks mental capacity, informed consent should be sought from someone
with parental responsibility, holder of a valid and applicable Lasting Power of Attorney³
or a court appointed health and welfare deputy. If there is no lawful representative,
a best interests decision should be taken on the person's behalf, applying the Mental
Capacity Act (MCA) 2005 and its most recent Code of Practice.
Where people have fluctuating mental capacity, their capacity 'at the material time' of
the decision should be assessed.
Any assessment of mental capacity is decision and purpose specific - in this case, it
relates to the DSR or C(E)TR only. The purpose of sharing any information needs to be
clear and recorded.
People who lack mental capacity should be as fully involved as they can be in any
decisions about their care.
³Documented and registered at the Office of The Public Guardian.
15
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
2.4.2 Children and young people
Consent should be sought directly from young people aged 16 or 17; they are presumed
to have sufficient mental capacity to decide about their treatment unless there is a
reason and/or evidence to indicate otherwise.
Children under the age of 16 can consent to a CETR and their inclusion on the DSR if
they are considered to have sufficient competence and understanding to fully appreciate
what is involved (Gillick competence). Otherwise, consent must be obtained on their
behalf from someone with parental responsibility. Regardless, parents and others with
parental responsibility should be fully involved in decisions unless that would prejudice
the child's wellbeing.
2.4.3 Where consent is not given
Each local system should have a process for:
Explaining the implications of this decision to the individual (or their representative),
and exploring the reasons for it with them and recording these. They should be
assured that withholding consent will not affect their current care provision or any
resources they are entitled to, and be made aware that they can change their mind at
any time.
Checking whether the person has adequate support from an advocate, or would
benefit from this, to explore their options, rights and decision-making.
Considering alternative approaches to independent review of a person's care, eg a
desktop review with input from those with clinical expertise.
Regularly reviewing and recording the person's wishes to ensure that they have an
opportunity to participate in the process should they change their mind.
The responsible commissioner should escalate any person who declines a C(E)TR on two
or more occasions to the ICS oversight panel (see section 18).
2.5 Information governance
The ICS is responsible for ensuring that people added to the DSR or people who have a
C(E)TR understood how their data will be used (who, what, how and why) at the point
they give consent to either process. This responsibility extends to unpaid carers where
information about them is included on the DSR.
The ICS must also ensure local data sharing agreements are in place to allow the
necessary data and information flow between agencies.
16
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Part A:
Dynamic support registers
The DSR should be organised in such
a way that adults, children and young
people can be identified when their
health and care needs are increasing or
complex, and may require a multi-agency
response, monitoring and prioritisation
for extra support.
The proactive management of the DSR should
enable the identification of people early
enough to enable interventions that may
prevent the need for a C(E)TR, but if required,
trigger a community C(E)TR at the appropriate
time.
Terms relating to DSRs are defined in the
glossary (section 22).
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
3. Core standards for dynamic
support registers
The following core standards underpin best practice to reduce avoidable admissions.
They have been tried and tested in areas with well-developed registers.
1. The ICB learning disability and autism executive lead (usually a chief nurse or
executive director for commissioning) have oversight of local DSRs to ensure effective
collaboration between health organisations and local authority partners.
2. ICBs are accountable for DSRs across their footprint. The ICB can delegate this
responsibility to a partner organisation, such as a local authority or NHS trust.
3. Every ICS/ICB has a named lead person with responsibility for the maintenance of the
DSR. For children this is usually a commissioner for children and young people DSRs
and for adults a commissioner for wellbeing.
4. Every ICB publishes its self-referral process for people who want to request their
addition to the DSR (see section 7). (For children and young people this must be
published on the SEND local offer website as a minimum.)
5. Every local area has a single point of contact for people who want more information
about the register, including any self-referral processes.
6. Every local area has a standard process for gaining informed consent to be added to
the register, or for a best interest decision to be taken. (Local areas need a process
for people who do not consent to registration on the DSR but still want to access a
C(E)TR.)
7. Every local area publishes its criteria for addition to the DSR - for 'at risk level', this is
included in the local offer for children and young people.
8. Every local area has a standard process for reviewing a person's risk to understand
their needs. A RAG rating on the DSR (see section 4) reflects a person's risk and
activates a timely response to changing needs.
9. The DSR links to the local response, which must include multi-agency ways of
working and processes and, as a minimum, referrals to access keyworker services
and C(E)TRs. There are effective ways for information to flow between a C(E)TR and
the DSR.
As a minimum:
each time a C(E)TR takes place, the person's RAG rating on the DSR is reviewe
C(E)TR recommendations are recorded on the DSR.
DSR stratification (see section 4) should involve review of community C(E)TR
recommendations, and inpatient C(E)TR recommendations for those at risk of re-
admission, plus any pertinent information from relevant meetings, eg multi-agency
meetings and child in need meetings.
18
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
10. All children, young people and adults on the DSR should have a multi-agency care
plan and risk management plan. These should identify the lead health or social care
professional accountable for the delivery of each action. The plans must align with
any C(E)TR recommendations. Where a plan is not in place, the lead professional is
responsible for creating one with the person and the agencies involved.
11. Local areas with separate DSRs for children and adults have a clear process for
moving children to the adult DSR.
3.1 Minimum requirements
DSRs must:
1. Identify children, young people and adults with a learning, disability, autism or both
who are at immediate risk of admission to a mental health hospital, including those
in urgent and emergency care (UEC) departments waiting for a mental health bed
and those at risk of mental health hospital admission (best practice areas include
other institutional care).
2. Identify children, young people and adults with a learning disability, autism or both
who will be at immediate risk of admission to a mental health hospital if they do not
receive urgent or immediate intervention.
3. Include a specific focus on identifying autistic children, young people and adults
at risk of admission to a mental health hospital, including those who may not be
known to mental health and learning disability services.
4. Ensure a clear link between the DSR and C(E)TRs so that children, young people and
adults at risk of admission to a mental health hospital are offered a community C(E)
TR in line with this policy.
5. Ensure a clear link between the DSR and the children and young people's keyworker
service.
6. ICSs should work with all local authorities in the footprint to include on DSRs's
children and young people who are in 52-week residential schools and colleges. They
may be placed at a distance from home and their needs are likely to be significant
when they return home or their education or placement changes. Their level of risk
should be determined using the risk stratification process.
7. Include people discharged from a mental health hospital for a period of review. This
period should be determined by the timing of post-discharge C(E)TRs/multiagency
meetings, risk stratification process and any post-discharge plans.
19
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
8. Children, young people and adults who are placed out of area must remain on the
DSR of the placing area or area with commissioning responsibility.
9. Professionals who work with people on the DSR should identify whether they have
unpaid carers and if they do, note this on the DSR. This is so that the person on the
DSR will be cared for should their unpaid carers no longer be able to provide care
and/or need to reduce the level of care they provide (see section 9.5).
3.2 Minimum dataset to be captured
All local registers should capture the minimum dataset requirements. These are:
identifiable information (name or NHS patient number)
name of the lead health and/or social care professional responsible for the multi-
agency care plan
name of current service provider or support in place through a personal budget
whether or not the person has a current care plan that includes contingency planning
with a current risk assessment in place
date of last review of care plans and risk assessment
whether or not the person is at immediate risk of placement breakdown and/or
admission (including their RAG rating)
date community C(E)TR(s) held
reason why the person is at risk of placement breakdown and/or admission
whether the person has been offered a personal budget, personal health budget or
integrated personal budget where this is appropriate.
date consent given for inclusion on DSR.
20
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
4. Risk stratification
All local systems must have an agreed approach to the proactive monitoring of and
intervention for people on the DSR, including where:
the person places themselves or others at serious and/or significant risk of harm
the person's community placement or tenancy, residential special school or care and
support placement is at risk of breakdown and this would pose a significant risk to the
safety and wellbeing of the person and/or others
the person presents to the police
the person presents to urgent and emergency care services
mental health hospital admission is being considered
the person was admitted to a mental health hospital in the last year
the person was supported by a mental health crisis team in the last year
one or more factors put the person at increased risk of admission (see Appendix 1).
For this, all local systems should use a RAG rating or similar locally agreed process to
stratify the needs of those on their DSR. This is to ensure early identification of people
whose needs may require a comprehensive response and to keep sight of those whose
needs may escalate and require an enhanced, different or more specialist response.
The DSR must include information on the following for all levels of risk:
partners who need to be involved in a C(E)TR if required
a person-centred plan that identifies needs, support being accessed and the lead
professionals involved in the person's care
review of carer needs (with appropriate consent)
lead professional.
21
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Table 1 outlines the required minimum support offer for each RAG rating.
RED
There is an immediate risk that the person will be admitted to a
mental health hospital.
The person and/or their family are experiencing a crisis and the risk of admission to a
mental health hospital are not being or cannot be managed in the community.
Linked processes:
a C(E)TR must take place (see part B)
referral to the keyworker service (for people aged 0-25 years) if the person is not
already known to this service.
AMBER
There will be an immediate risk that the person will be admitted to a
mental health hospital without urgent intervention.
There could be a significantly increased risk of the person becoming mentally unwell
and/or placement/family breakdown.
Linked processes:
multi-agency meeting and/or C(E)TR
referral to the keyworker service (0-25 years), if not already known to this service.
GREEN
There are some risks that could lead to the person being admitted or
re-admitted to a mental health hospital; but currently these risks are
being effectively managed.
Linked process:
clear identification of partners who would need to be involved in a C(E)TR if
required.
BLUE
A separate rating must identify those children, young people and
adults currently in inpatient services.
Linked processes:
this rating should be used to identify people requiring commissioner oversight
visits and inpatient C(E)TRs.
22
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
DSR risk stratification, like all other related processes in this policy, can only take place
with informed consent (see section 2.4 for further guidance).
The risk stratification/RAG rating processes must take account of:
1. The person's view about their current situation, with advocacy support in line with
this policy and legal entitlements (see section 16.8 and Appendix 5).
2. The family's view about the current situation, with support from local parent carer
forums, special educational needs and disabilities advice and support services or
other locally commissioned services.
3. Risk assessment using locally developed tools
We recommend use of the Cheshire and Wirral Partnership dynamic support
database clinical support tool (see Appendix 2) or similar locally developed
alternative to support risk stratification and RAG rating.
Cheshire and Wirral NHS Foundation Trust has developed a web-based training
tool in the use of the DSR for health and social care staff. The training includes
information about risk scoring people with a learning disability and autistic people
and case studies from people who have been supported through the tool.
For further information: www.england.nhs.uk/learning-disabilities/dynamic-registers-
and-dynamic-systems/dynamic-support-database-dsd-and-clinical-support-tool/
4. Professional judgement, which must include structured multi-agency assessment
and regular review meetings.
Local areas should facilitate regular multi-agency review meetings to manage the DSR,
stratify risk and agree appropriate cross-system actions and support. There must be a
shared process of accountability with a clear structure of escalation for red/amber cases.
This will involve named senior managers across health and local authority services.
23
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
5. Self-referral
Local areas should co-produce with system partners a process for people and families
to self-refer for inclusion on the DSR, and publish this, as a minimum on the local offer
website. Their inclusion will then be considered against locally developed criteria. A
process for dealing with any disputes about inclusion will also be needed.
This process should be developed alongside accessible information and guidance about
avoiding inappropriate admission to a mental health hospitals, the DSR and access to
locally offered support. There should be a clear link to the information about right to
request a C(E)TR, and people requesting C(E)TRs should be considered for inclusion on
the DSR, depending on their level of risk and consent to this.
6. Consent for placement on the register
See section 2.4.
7. Data governance and information sharing
See section 2.5.
8. Transition planning
Systems should consider the benefits and challenges of holding one register for children
and young people and one for adults, including how inclusion criteria will align.
Where two registers are held, when a young person will move to the adult register needs
to be agreed.
Transitions team must have access to both registers and associated services.
24
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
9. Partnership working
Dynamic support systems and processes rely on effective partnership working between
health, local authorities, education and social care partners. Notably, for children and
young people, health commissioners and local authorities should work together to align
the DSR with the disabled children's register⁴.
9.1 Community Care (Education) and Treatment Reviews
Best practice areas suggest C(E)TRs are most useful when they happen for people who
are identified within the amber part of the register as a means of early identification and
prevention.
A community C(E)TR must take place when a person is identified as red on the DSR (at
immediate risk of admission), unless a C(E)TR has already taken place.
There may be occasions when a C(E)TR is held for someone who has not consented to or
is not part of the DSR. It is not mandatory for someone to be on the DSR to be able to
have a C(E)TR, although the reasons why they are not should be explored.
The link between the DSR and C(E)TRs is further described in part B.
9.2 Keyworking
The local keyworker service should be linked to the DSR.
By March 2024 children and young people with a learning disability, autism or both
aged 0-25 years with the most complex needs will have a designated keyworker. Initially,
children and young people who are inpatients or at risk of being admitted to hospital
(as a minimum those with a red/amber rating on the DSR) should have access to support
from the keyworker service.
Keyworkers support children, young people and their families to avoid admission to
a mental health hospital wherever possible. Where admission to hospital cannot be
avoided, the keyworker should remain as a core member of the professional network
throughout the person's period of admission, and be included in CETRs and support
through to discharge.
⁴The Children Act 1989 requires that: Every local authority shall open and maintain a register of
disabled children within their area (Schedule 2 Part 1(2)).
The Children and Families Act 2014 states "A local authority in England must exercise its
functions with a view to securing that it identifies (a) all the children and young people in
its area who have or may have special educational needs, and (b) all the children and young
people in its area who have a disability." (s22 of Part 3)
25
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
9.3 Housing
Planning around housing and accommodation for adults and children should be linked to
the DSR.
Inappropriate housing can be a contributing risk factor for admission and delayed
discharge (eg when a property does not meet the person's and their family's needs) and
must be considered as such.
Accommodation needs should be considered as early as possible, eg at the point of
admission, as they can take time to address and resolve.
Our housing webpage provides further information.
9.4 Personalised approaches
The DSR should prompt discussion of how personalised budgets and resources may
support a person or their family.
Where possible, people with a learning disability and autistic people should be enabled
to have either a personal health budget (PHB; health), a personal budget (social care) or
an integrated budget (health and social care).
This is in line with the legal right for people who are eligible for continuing healthcare or
Section 117 funding to have a PHB and the statutory requirements of the Care Act with
regard to personal budgets and NHS Long Term Plan commitments. In addition, health
and social care commissioners should consider making available flexible extra support
that can be called on at short notice to prevent crisis or avoid hospital admission where
possible.
9.5 Carer contingency planning
For persons with unpaid carers and stratified as red/amber on the DSR, professionals
should discuss with the carer whether a contingency plan should be developed as part of
the dynamic support offer; and if it is, support them to create it. Such plans describe the
necessary actions should the carer no longer be able to provide care or needs to decrease
what they provide.
With appropriate consent, relevant information from the contingency plan should be
shared with those professionals who may need to action it.
Unpaid carers should be made aware of their right to a referral for a Carers Assessment
(as set out in the Care Act 2014), what it involves and how this may support them in
their caring role, and signposted to local health and wellbeing support offers.
26
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
9.6 DSR information and advice
Local partners should agree how people and families are made aware of the support
available to them, eg through the local offer for children and young people⁵ and the Care
Act requirements for adults⁶. Under Section 4 of the Care Act 2014, the local authority
must establish, co-ordinate and maintain a service(s) that provides accessible, up-to-date,
accurate, comprehensive but proportionate advice and local information about care and
support for people and support for carers. For this it is good practice to work closely with
children, young people, adults and their families and carers. Much can be learned from
their experiences of what is and is not helpful.
⁵Children and Families Act 2014 SEND Code of Practice 2015
⁶s1 Care Act 2014
27
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Part B:
Care (Education) and
Treatment Reviews
It is not mandatory for someone to be
on the DSR to be able to have a C(E)TR,
although the reasons why they are not
should be explored.
A C(E)TR is a person-centred review to
ensure the care (education) and treatment
and support needs of the individual person
and their family are met, and that barriers to
progress and/or discharge are challenged and
overcome.
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
10. Summary of key changes to
the C(E)TR policy 2017
Key change
Description
Section
Dynamic support
The new policy for DSRs has been
Sections 3 to 9
register (DSR)
combined with the renewed C(E)TR) policy.
policy
Increased focus on
The importance of advocacy for adults,
Section 16.8
advocacy
child and young people pre-C(E)TR, during
And referenced
the C(E)TR and post-C(E)TR is recognised.
throughout the
policy
Increased focus on
Advocacy should be facilitated throughout
Section 16.9
physical health
the process.
Increased focus on
Increased focus in the C(E)TR key lines
Section 16.7
quality of life
of enquiry (KLOE) on assessing whether
And referenced
physical health needs are being met.
throughout the
policy
Additional trigger
New question in the C(E)TR KLOE on
Section 13.1
points for C(E)TR
quality of life and strengthened focus on
participation in meaningful activity.
Additional C(E)TRs should be carried out in
the following circumstances:
six weeks after admission to hospital if a
community C(E)TR has been undertaken
if a person moves between hospitals and/
or security level within the same hospital
if a person receives a diagnosis of a
learning disability or autism during their
admission in hospital
if a clinical review identifies that someone
who has a diagnosis of autism or a
learning disability has been incorrectly
diagnosed and the removal of this
diagnosis is proposed.
29
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Key change
Description
Section
Option for the
People should be consulted as to whether
Section 16.6
same C(E)TR panel
they would prefer the same panel (where
to undertake
possible) to undertake their next review.
follow-up review
There may be cases where it is considered
beneficial to use a different panel
although the individual's wishes should be
considered.
Implementation
Each ICS must develop oversight panels
Section 18
of an oversight
that convene at least quarterly and review
process via ICS
the C(E)TRs of people for whom there is
oversight panels
concern.
Mandatory training
All C(E)TR panel members will be expected
Section 16.3
for panel members
to complete mandatory C(E)TR induction
Appendix 11
training.
Payment structure
New suggested minimum rates of pay
Appendix 11
for experts by
defined for expert by experience and
experience and
clinical expert panel members.
clinical experts
30
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
11. Principles
The 'spirit' in which C(E)TRs are carried out is rooted in principles of human rights,
person-centeredness and co-production.
Person (child, young person or adult) centred and family centred
Evidence based
Rights led
Seeing the whole person
Open, independent, and challenging
Nothing about us without us
Action focused
Living life in the community.
Appendix 3 lists the principles and associated standards. The associated C(E)TR code and
toolkit, which includes the principles and standards, sits alongside the policy to provide
a solid framework for C(E)TRs to be delivered to a consistently high standard across
England.
31
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
12. The C(E)TR panel
Panel members need to familiarise themselves with the principles and standards, and
hold each other to account on these.
The C(E)TR panel must include:
Chair
The responsible commissioner. If they are unable to attend
the review they must delegate authority to undertake this
role to someone who can.
Responsible for ensuring that all panel members feel able to
contribute to the review and that their views are reflected in
the final report and recommendations.
Independent
Someone with a relevant health professional qualification
clinical expert
and active registration with a relevant professional body.
They should also hold professional indemnity insurance that
covers them to practise on an independent basis.
Independent
Someone with relevant lived experience or a family member
expert by
of someone with relevant lived experience.
experience
If the review is for a child or young person, the inclusion of a children's social care or
education professional on the panel should be considered.
If the review is for a person with specific physical health needs or a complex medication
regimen, the panel may need a further clinical expert (eg a pharmacist).
The ICB will be responsible for the recruitment and support of experts by experience
(often through a locally developed expert hub) and clinical experts, where appropriate,
delegating responsibility at a place-based level.
Appendix 11 provides information on recruiting and supporting panel members.
32
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
13. When are C(E)TRs triggered?
Note: The C(E)TR does not decide whether a person should be admitted to or discharged
from hospital. This remains the responsibility of clinicians (or the courts/Ministry of Justice
(MoJ) under Part 3 of the Mental Health Act 1983).
If a clinician judges that urgent admission to an acute mental health hospital is necessary
for someone with a mental health problem who presents a risk to themselves or others,
then a C(E)TR should not be used to delay or obstruct this process. However, a post-
admission C(E)TR must still be undertaken in line with the timescales given in Table 2
below.
Similarly, a pending C(E)TR should not obstruct or delay the normal discharge/care
planning processes that may allow a person to leave hospital.
13.1 Trigger points
Table 2 sets out when adults and children and young people should have a C(E)TR, with
each type of review described in sections 14.1 to 14.7.
CTR pathway for adults in non-secure services, including acute mental health,
rehab, assessment and treatment
Type of
Maximum time
Minimum frequency
Notes
review
for completion
of repeat reviews
Community
Prior to admission
6 weeks after admission
Additional CTRs
CTR
and then 6 monthly
if other trigger
(unless hospital transfer
points hit
occurs)
No community
Post-admission CTR
6 monthly (unless
Additional CTRs
CTR (or local
within 28 days (20
hospital transfer occurs)
if other trigger
area emergency
working days)
points hit
protocol (LAEP)
33
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
CTR pathway for adults in secure services via non-criminal justice route
Type of
Maximum time
Minimum frequency
Notes
review
for completion
of repeat reviews
Community
Prior to admission
6 weeks after admission
Additional CTRs
CTR
and then 12 monthly
if other trigger
(unless hospital transfer
points hit
occurs)
No community
Post admission CTR
12 monthly (unless
Additional CTRs
CTR (or LAEP)
within 28 days (20
hospital transfer occurs
if other trigger
working days)
points hit
CTR pathway for adults in secure services via criminal justice route (prison or court)
Type of
Maximum time
Minimum frequency
Notes
review
for completion
of repeat reviews
Exempt from
Post-admission CTR
12 monthly (unless
Additional CTRs
community CTR
within 28 days (20
hospital transfer occurs)
if other trigger
working days)
points hit
C(E)TR pathway for children and young people up to 25 if education health and
care plan in place or if the young person remains in the CYP mental health tier 4
hospital (post 18 years)
Type of
Maximum time
Minimum frequency
Notes
review
for completion
of repeat reviews
Community
Prior to admission
6 weeks after admission
Additional CETRs
C(E)TR
and then 3 monthly
if other trigger
(unless hospital transfer
points hit
occurs
No community
CETR within 14 days
3 monthly (unless
Additional CETRs
C(E)TR (or LAEP)
(10 working days)
hospital transfer occurs)
if other trigger
points hit
34
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
CTR pathway (all ages) for person identified as requiring hospital transfer
and/or change in security settings within the same hospital
Type of
Maximum time
Minimum frequency
Notes
review
for completion
of repeat reviews
C(E)TR
Within 6 weeks of
C(E)TRs to continue as
transfer
per minimum timescales
for relevant pathway
C(E)TR pathway (all ages) for person diagnosed as autistic or having a
learning disability while in hospital
Type of
Maximum time
Minimum frequency
Notes
review
for completion
of repeat reviews
C(E)TR
Refer to post-
C(E)TRs to continue as
admission timescales:
per minimum timescales
28 days (20 working
for relevant pathway
days) for adults and
14 days (10 working
days) for children and
young people
CTR pathway (all ages) for removal of a diagnosis of autism or a learning
disability is being considered during an inpatient stay
Type of
Maximum time
Minimum frequency
Notes
review
for completion
of repeat reviews
C(E)TR
C(E)TR to be
Recommendations
undertaken prior
to consider impact
to any diagnostic
of diagnostic
changes being
changes and
formally made
possible removal
from Assuring
Transformation for
individual
35
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Learning from the safe and wellbeing reviews, serious case reviews and serious incident
reviews, along with views from stakeholders and partners, prompted a review of the
triggers for a C(E)TR and the review timetables. The following circumstances are new
triggers for a C(E)TR in this updated policy:
six weeks after admission to hospital if a community C(E)TR has been undertaken
if a person is transferred to another hospitals or to a setting within the same hospital
with a different security level
if a person receives a diagnosis of autism or a learning disability during their admission
in hospital
if a clinical review identifies that someone has been incorrectly diagnosed with autism
or a learning disability and removal of the diagnosis is proposed.
13.2 Requesting a C(E)TR sooner than the minimum timescales
(adults, children and young people)
A C(E)TR can be requested sooner than the timescales given in Table 2 by the
following people:
person in receipt of services
person's family or carer
responsible commissioner
advocate for the person in receipt of services
inpatient or community team supporting the person.
It can be requested:
both for people living in the community and those who have been admitted
whenever there are concerns about the suitability of a service, the treatment plan, the
individual's safety and wellbeing and/or, for inpatients, there is no clear discharge or
transfer date and plan.
Requests for C(E)TRs should be directed to the case manager or responsible
commissioner. Their first response should be to address the concerns that led to the
request as promptly and thoroughly as possible, including by arranging additional
support if the concern relates to possible hospital admission; potentially avoiding the
need for a review.
Local areas must have a process for requesting a C(E)TR; how decisions are reached
and whether an appeal can be made where a request is denied; and how decisions are
recorded and communicated to the person and their family.
36
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Figure 2: Process for requesting a C(E)TR and managing the request
C(E)TR
Case
C(E)TR is
requested by:
manager:
arranged:
person
identify key concerns
findings shared
family
consult clinical team
through ICS
advocate
consider
oversight
clinical team
appropriateness of a
panel.
commissioner.
C(E)TR at the person's
current stage in the
pathway
ensure any issues
that do not require a
C(E)TR are addressed
and escalated as
required.
Where it is decided that a C(E)TR will not benefit the person but the applicant continues
to feel one is necessary and appeals against the decision, the request should be escalated
to the commissioner to consider in line with locally established protocols.
Note: C(E)TR requests should not be regarded as a form of complaint and should not be
handled through usual complaints channels.
C(E)TRs undertaken outside usual timeframes will automatically be reviewed by the ICS
oversight panel (see section 18).
37
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
14. Focus of each type of review
14.1 C(E)TRs - community
A community C(E)TR should be initiated where mental health hospital admission for
a person is being actively considered or sought. This will help establish whether the
person's care, education and treatment needs could instead be met effectively and safely
in the community through additional and/or alternative support and interventions. All
alternatives should be explored, including consideration of flexible individual payments
through offering a personal budget, PHB or integrated budget (whether this has been
offered should be checked) and resources used flexibly to meet people's needs.
Resources may include specialist health teams, local authority respite/short break
provision (supported by specialist health teams), voluntary agencies, short breaks and
self-advocate and carer organisations to provide peer support. The C(E)TR can ensure
that the personal and long-term impact on quality of life and an individual's human rights
are given high priority alongside the financial cost of appropriate intervention.
Hospitals should only be used when not to do so would place the individual or others
at risk of significant physical, emotional or psychological harm. This decision should be
based on a comprehensive risk assessment by a multidisciplinary team (MDT), adhering
to locally agreed protocols, within the context of all appropriate legal and procedural
frameworks. The risk assessment process should reflect levels of evidenced risk and must
seek to balance the safety needs of local communities against the rights and freedoms of
the individual.
A clear, detailed and outcome-focused care and treatment plan should be developed
as part of the community C(E)TR for all individuals to be admitted to a mental health
hospital. The plan should specify what issues require further assessment, the value of
further assessment to the person's pathway of care and why this can only take place in a
hospital setting.
Admissions for assessment and treatment should not be used as 'step-down' or
intermediate placement while planning longer-term community support.
Planning for discharge and robust commitments to continuing support in a community
setting should be firmly established and documented before admission.
Where a person is at the point of 'crisis' action is urgent and it is unlikely a community
C(E)TR can be set up quickly enough to direct this. However, even in urgent
circumstances an assertive, fast and measured review needs to be undertaken to
safeguard against the person being admitted unnecessarily to an inpatient service. A
meeting, possibly virtually, should be set up to engage the person, their family and all
those around them to think creatively about what potential alternative supports and
interventions could be put in place. This does not constitute a community C(E)TR and
should not be referred to as such. Appendix 8 outlines the local area emergency protocol
38
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
(LAEP) that was used by Plymouth Clinical Commissioning Group to identify alternatives
to hospital admission if appropriate. Should such people be admitted, the post admission
C(E)TR process should be followed (see Table 2 and section 14.2).
Discussions around the person and family's support needs should consider the person's
advocacy needs, ideally before any community C(E)TR takes place, such as when the
person is identified on the DSR. Advocacy will support the person's involvement in
and understanding of the C(E)TR process and its aim of avoiding admission whenever
possible; it should also support family carer involvement whenever possible. Where
admission to hospital is likely, the community C(E)TR can help to describe the ongoing
advocacy support the person may need during their admission and following discharge.
See section 16.8 and Appendix 5 for further information on advocacy.
14.2 C(E)TRs - post-admission if no community C(E)TR held
If a community C(E)TR has not been possible in advance of admission, a post-admission
review is carried out - both for those detained under the Mental Health Act and those
admitted informally.
This should be within 14 days (10 working days) for children and young people, and 28
days (20 working days) for adults.
The purpose of the post-admission C(E)TR is to:
review the circumstances and route to admission to establish if hospital is the most
appropriate setting for a person's care or if this could be provided in the community or
another setting
establish the purpose of admission, expected outcomes, timescales and expected
length of stay
ensure that planning is underway for discharge with preliminary timescales and any
commissioning that may be required to support discharge (eg housing/workforce)
begins as early as possible.
Best practice is to use root cause analysis at this point in the pathway (NHS England
provides resources for this approach). Learning from unplanned admissions is essential
to understanding how to prevent these. Root cause analysis should underpin service
development and local C(E)TRs and DSR processes.
14.3 Review C(E)TRs - inpatient
These reviews focus on the safety, care and future planning for people who are admitted
to and remain in specialist inpatient assessment and/or treatment services.
39
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
A person who has had a community C(E)TR but is still admitted to hospital should have
a repeat review within six weeks if they remain an inpatient, and further repeat reviews
according to the minimum frequency given in Table 2. These should establish the reasons
for extended hospital stay, barriers to progression and discharge, and whether the
correct or most effective treatments are being provided. They should be solution focused,
looking to find ways to overcome barriers to discharge, and result in agreed actions,
responsibilities and timelines, and how these will be monitored.
Ideally before the 'final' pre-discharge C(E)TR and certainly at that one, the panel
should consider the person's advocacy needs when they leave hospital and what
statutory entitlement exists for this (see section 16.8 and Appendix 5). A self-advocacy
organisation may help people build friendships, networks and access to things that help
them achieve their hopes and ambitions. Post-discharge advocacy is likely to work best
when it is arranged before discharge, giving the person the opportunity to get to know
or even choose their future advocate(s).
For people who are subject to Ministry of Justice (MoJ) requirements, the protocol in
Appendix 10 supports effective working with the MoJ. It is based on learning from
MoJ-related barriers to discharge or transfer and enables MoJ monitoring and oversight
of C(E)TR outcomes for restricted patients with a learning disability, autism or both.
The appendix also provides MoJ guidance on the information it needs to support the
decision-making process for discharge. It is important that this is provided as early in
the process as possible to avoid unnecessary delays from case workers needing to seek
further information.
14.4 People in long-term segregation - independent care (education)
and treatment reviews
On 5 November 2019, the Secretary of State for Health and Social Care announced the
urgent review of the care of all people with a learning disability and/or autistic people
in long-term segregation (LTS) in mental health hospitals. This work was overseen by
Baroness Hollins.
People in LTS should have regular C(E)TRs as per the relevant inpatient pathway but are
also entitled to have an independently chaired review (IC(E)TR). This is a one-off review
that can take place when a C(E)TR would have been due, and should be aligned with the
C(E)TR process and timescales to ensure consistency with recommendations.
For these reviews LTS is defined as:
'Nursing or caring for a person in enforced isolation, regardless of whether the
procedures and requirements of the MHA Code of Practice 2015 for long-term
40
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
segregation are met. The enforced isolation must have been in place for 48 hours or
more. It should still be considered segregation even if the person is allowed periods
of interaction with staff and or peers.' (CQC Thematic review of the use of restraint,
prolonged seclusion, and segregation for people with mental health problems a learning
disability and/or autism 2019)
The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC), NHS England and the Care Quality
Commission (CQC) together deliver IC(E)TRs. They follow the same process as for a C(E)
TR and are co-ordinated by the responsible commissioner, but the panel is enhanced by:
an independent chair appointed by DHSC
a CQC Mental Health Act reviewer.
NHS England manages this process nationally, with the NHS regional lead responsible
for reporting to the national team every six weeks to identify people subject to LTS and
therefore entitled to an IC(E)TR.
14.5 Transfers from one hospital to another
When an individual is transferred from one hospital to another or to a setting within
the same hospital with a different level of security (an increase or decrease), a C(E)TR
should take place within six weeks of transfer (see Table 2). The focus of this review is
the same as for any inpatient C(E)TR, with consideration of whether the clinical aims of
the new admission are being met and whether there is a clear rationale for why care and
treatment cannot be safely delivered in the community.
14.6 When a diagnosis is given during an inpatient stay
People who are diagnosed as autistic or as having a learning disability during their stay in
an inpatient unit will need to be added to the Assuring Transformation database and are
entitled to a C(E)TR. This review should be arranged in line with the post-admission C(E)
TR timescales (10 working days for children and young people and 20 working days for
adults) (see Table 2).
14.7 When the removal of a diagnosis is being considered during an
inpatient stay
The assessment and formulation process when a person is admitted to an inpatient unit
may lead the clinical team to consider removing or changing their diagnosis of autism
or a learning disability. A C(E)TR should be undertaken before any final decision (see
Table 2) to ensure the individual, their family and advocate have been included in the
decision-making process and that the impact of the change on their care, education and
treatment has been fully considered. Removal of a diagnosis will mean the person no
longer meets the requirements to be included in the Assuring Transformation database.
41
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
15. Access to specialised children and young
people mental health services (CYPMHS)
Any child or young person who is at risk of admission, given the nature of their mental
health needs, should first have had a planned community CETR. All relevant agencies in
the local area must be invited to participate in this review (including education, health
and social care). (The exception is where admission would be via the criminal justice
system, from court or prison, when a post-admission CETR only would apply.)
If the outcome of a community CETR is that referral to specialist NHS commissioning
for access to a secure or CYPMHS bed is the appropriate option, the CETR will have
established a foundation for the access assessment (as described in the NHS standard
contract and service specification for NHS responsible commissioners for children and
young people and adults). These assessments determine the most appropriate placement
to meet the person's mental health need and provide the level of relational security they
require.
For children aged under 18, integration of the CETR process and access assessment
ensures the person's whole care pathway is considered and will help widen the range
of treatment options and support available to the child, young person and their family.
It further ensures that all alternatives to secure provision are explored before a secure
setting is agreed as the appropriate placement.
42
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
16. The review process
This section should be read together with the C(E)TR code and toolkit.
The ICB will be responsible for overseeing implementation and co-ordination of C(E)TRs.
All reviews should be a positive and inclusive experience, adhere to a prescribed level of
quality and result in the best outcomes for the person being reviewed.
The review process should complement the overall care pathway for the person,
including the multidisciplinary team (MDT) process and commissioner oversight visits.
While the C(E)TR meeting will likely take place on one day, preparation and follow-up
work will be required to ensure the review best meets the needs of the person. The panel
should be flexible about the agenda and as far as practicable meet the person at a time
that is convenient for them.
The expectation is that C(E)TRs take place face-to-face. The opportunity to meet
the person and see their environment is essential for understanding their day-to-day
experience.
If a panel member has good reasons why they cannot attend in person, then a hybrid
method (virtual and face to face) should be considered where there is no alternative and
this will not undermine the quality of the review.
If family, carers or professionals from relevant agencies cannot attend in person, their
virtual attendance should be considered on a case-by-case basis.
16.1 Sit and see
The responsible commissioner is required to undertake an oversight visit every six weeks
for children and every eight weeks for adults they are commissioning services for, to
ensure their safety and wellbeing.
At the last oversight visit before a planned C(E)TR, the commissioner should undertake a
'sit and see' observation to inform the C(E)TR.
The precise timing of planned C(E)TRs should consider when the person's next oversight
visit is due, as well as other meetings, to ensure that they are receiving oversight of their
care in a planned way.
16.2 C(E)TRs and multidisciplinary team approach
It is important to note the recent changes to the Care Programme Approach: NHS
England position statement. While recommendations from C(E)TRs have previously been
integrated into CPA meetings, this should continue within the MDT approach in the
absence of CPA reviews.
43
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
C(E)TRs are not MDT reviews, though they will cover many of the same core areas and
can inform the local MDT process.
The differences in C(E)TR emphasis and process are:
provide a degree of independent scrutiny; they involve independent clinical experts and
experts by experience
challenge elements of the care and treatment plans where appropriate
are chaired by and directly involve the responsible commissioner
routinely involve local authorities.
It is important to define the relationship between C(E)TRs and MDT meetings. The
outcomes of a person's C(E)TR should feed directly into the MDT process, and be used to
inform revision of the MDT plan for that person.
The responsible clinician is responsible for completing MDT plans and sharing them with
others, including the individual and their family. They also have overall accountability for
the implementation of the agreed actions from a C(E)TR and for follow-up.
MDT meetings subsequent to a C(E)TR will review whether actions have been completed,
with progress fed back to the C(E)TR panel chair at agreed intervals. The person and their
family will also be kept updated on progress.
There can be benefits and challenges to holding a C(E)TR on the same day as an MDT
review meeting. Generally, they should only be if this is the preference of the individual
and their family. Information should be provided about the possible advantages and
disadvantages of having both reviews on the same date. Advantages may include
professionals and family being more likely to attend, and the person only having to
have one day of meetings and not having to repeat any clinical updates. However, the
MDT review could reduce the amount of time the C(E)TR panel have to talk to people
individually and make observations on the ward. The focus of an MDT review will also be
quite different to that of a C(E)TR and will not include independent scrutiny of the care
the person is receiving.
16.3 Before the review
1. The responsible commissioner must ensure that informed consent has been sought
from the person whose review it is (and for a child or young person, from those
with parental responsibility as well as the child/young person) or for those who lack
mental capacity, a holder of a valid and applicable Lasting Power of Attorney or a
court appointed health and welfare deputy, both for the process and the required
information sharing that enables it (see section 2.4: Consent and section 2.5:
Information governance).
44
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
2. The person should be supported so that they understand the process, are giving
informed consent and have time to consider their views and feelings, using My C(E)
TR planner where appropriate. This should include a discussion about the best way to
conduct the review, including whether running it over more than one day would best
meet the person's needs.
3. Consideration should be given to equality and diversity, including any protected
characteristics - both in the planning process and when appointing a panel to
undertake the review.
4. Consideration should be given to involving an interpreter or British Sign Language
signer, or someone who can communicate in the person's preferred communication
method, to ensure the person and/or their family members are appropriately
supported to engage in the review, and arrangements made accordingly.
5. The family, wherever appropriate, will be given information about the C(E)TR) process.
This may involve the panel chair or one of the expert advisers telephoning them to
discuss the process (the expert by experience may be best placed to do this, but this is
not expected in every case).
6. The commissioner will liaise with the inpatient or local community service to find
an appropriate venue for the review, one that makes it easy for the person and
their family to take part. If the family cannot be at the review in person, secure live
video communication or phone facilities should be made available to enable their
participation.
7. All parties involved in the review will be sent information by the designated
administrator explaining the process. A diverse range of expert advisers (both clinical
experts and experts by experience) who meet the 'expert adviser' specification
(provided in the C(E)TR code and toolkit) will be appointed.
8. In identifying both experts by experience and clinical experts, the responsible
commissioner or their delegated co-ordinator should ensure that the knowledge,
skills and experience of the experts are commensurate with the needs and diagnosis
of the person and/or any particular issues that warrant enhanced expertise. For
example, a psychiatrist's input may be useful for contentious medication issues, or a
clinical psychologist where issues concern behaviour management or the need for
psychological therapies.
9. Consideration should be given to whether an education and/or social care expert
should be included in the C(E)TR panel.
45
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
10. Where the review will discuss issues of a particularly sensitive/emotive nature,
the responsible commissioner should be aware of these when selecting potential
reviewers and ensure they have appropriate support during and following the review.
11. All C(E)TR panel members will be expected to complete mandatory C(E)TR induction
training provided via Health Education England.
12. Review panel members will receive information about who is sitting on the panel and
they will be working with, and the appropriate review tools.
13. The person having the review and family members where appropriate will be sent the
names, roles and, where possible, photographs of those on the review panel.
14. Where possible, a designated administrator should be identified to ensure timely and
thorough co-ordination, forward planning and communication for C(E)TRs.
16.4 Who to invite to the review
The person whose review it is. It is vital that the person is fully supported to
participate in their review in whatever way they prefer.
Parents or those with parental responsibility for children and young people.
They should always be part of the review (unless there are exceptional circumstances or
significant safeguarding reasons to prevent this; these should be clearly noted).
Family carers. Unless a person who has capacity determines they do not wish their
family to be involved or there are exceptional circumstances or significant safeguarding
reasons to prevent this, family carers and/or members should always be invited to
participate in the review.
Siblings. Consider the engagement and involvement of siblings in the C(E)TR process.
They often play a significant part in the lives, care and support of their brother or sister.
They can also often bring a unique perspective about the difficulties that their sibling may
be experiencing and what is important to and for them.
Commissioners responsible for the person's care following discharge (includes
local authority colleagues or joint commissioners). Their involvement in the review
is essential for planning for the future and understanding and resolving any barriers to
progress.
Responsible clinician. The responsible clinician is an essential attendee. They are
clinically accountable for the person's care and treatment and have an essential role in
progressing recommendations.
Senior nurse/clinical staff. Those senior nurse and clinical staff who are involved in the
daily care and treatment of the person should be invited and must attend the review.
46
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Advocate. The involvement of a person's advocate in the review is essential, should
they have one. An independent mental capacity advocate (IMCA), independent mental
health advocate (IMHA) or professional advocate may also be needed for a person in the
community who lacks friends and family to support them through the review process
(see section 16.8 and Appendix 5).
Children and young people's keyworkers. By March 2024, all children and young
people at risk of admission to hospital or in hospital should have a named keyworker.
The keyworker should always be invited and must attend the CETR. Keyworkers can play
an important part in the arrangement and delivery of, and follow-up from, CETRs. In
particular, they can help ensure links with and strengthen the consideration of education
in CETRs for children and young people who not in school.
Senior children's intervenors/senior intervenors. Senior children's intervenors work
with young people with the most complex needs and discharge planning challenges,
often those who have longer lengths of stay in hospital. Senior intervenors work
with adults who are in the most restrictive types of care. Their role is to help facilitate
discharge by working with systems to remove barriers. They should be invited to all C(E)
TRs.
Social care
Children's social care. Each local area has individual arrangements for the organisation
of children's social care provision, and it can be complex to ensure the right people are
invited to the review. If the child or young person has a named social worker, the request
to attend should be sent to them and their manager. If they do not, it should be sent to
the director of children's services.
While it is important to ensure a social worker who knows the child and family is
involved, it is as important to ensure that someone senior enough to make decisions
about service provision and support is also part of the review.
Social care transitions team. Adult social care should be made aware of children and
young people who have an education health and care plan (EHCP) or are likely to require
services as adults, as they begin to 'prepare for adulthood' in year 9 of school. Young
people begin to transition to adult services across health and social care from the age of
16 and both adult and children's social care should be invited to a young person's C(E)TR.
Adult social care. If the person has a named social worker, the request to attend a
CTR should be sent to them and their manager. If they do not, it should be sent to the
Director of Adult Social Care Services. While it is important to ensure a social worker who
knows the individual is involved, it is as important to ensure that someone senior enough
to make decisions about service provision and support is a part of the review.
47
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Education
Local authority education department. Each local area has individual arrangements for
the organisation of children and young people's education provision. It can be complex
to ensure the right people are invited to the review - both those involved most directly in
the child or young person's education and those who can make decisions about future
provision, support or services.
Where the child has an EHCP or is having an education, health and care assessment,
the local area's special educational needs (SEN) team - the team who oversee education
placements and other decisions about education provision - should always be involved in
a CETR. It is not enough to only invite someone from the child or young person's current
education setting as they cannot make decisions about new or enhanced educational
provision.
Education provider (multi-academy trust/school/college/pupil referral unit, etc).
Those who provide a young person's education often have unique knowledge about and
understanding of the young person. They are important contributors and must attend a
CETR.
For some children and young people, education provision may have broken down
because of behaviours that challenge or a mental health crisis, and this may in turn lead
to the need for a CETR. Even if the child or young person is no longer receiving a direct
service from a school, college or other type of education provider, their former education
provider's contribution to a CETR will be invaluable.
Community teams
Children and young people mental health services (CYPMHS)/community mental
health or learning disability team. All those involved with the child or young person
from the CYPMHS, community mental health or learning disability team should be invited
to the review. Again, they are likely to have essential information about previous support
and intervention.
Housing authority or provider. Where appropriate Adults with a learning disability
or autistic adults may live in their own home with care and support or a supported
living arrangement, or will be going to live in their own home or a supported living
arrangement when they are discharged. If so, a representative from the relevant team(s)
should be invited to contribute to the review.
Youth offending team (YOT). Where appropriate For children and young people who
are known to (or identified by) the youth offending service, any relevant and involved
professional from the YOT should be invited. Local authorities will have different models
for the oversight of YOTs, and it should not be assumed that YOTs are part of a wider
children's services department and that an invitation to the director of children's services
will be seen as an invitation to a YOT manager.
48
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Key healthcare providers. A broad range of healthcare professionals is likely to be
involved with people with a learning disability and autistic people, including community
paediatricians for children and allied services such as learning disability services,
occupational therapists and speech and language therapists. The review needs to
understand the types of assessments and interventions a person has received to support
their communication, particularly for those with behaviours that challenge.
Voluntary and community sector organisations providing services or support.
where appropriate Voluntary and community sector providers may have access to
information or assessments of help to the C(E)TR process.
16.5 How the review is conducted
1. The review will be carried out in a consultative and discursive manner, and has the
aim of exploring solutions to care and treatment issues that avoid admission or
unblock barriers to discharge. But at the same time it is based around a framework of
important themes and specific issues to be inquired after and, if necessary, challenged
(see section 16.7).
2. The C(E)TR review team have no regulatory powers but are empowered on behalf of
the person with a learning disability or autistic person to ask questions based on a
human rights and least restrictive framework. The team have a role in constructively
but robustly challenging inappropriate or ineffective practice, passing on any concerns
to relevant agencies, supporting cultural change and a shift to a community care
model.
3. The review will be expected to take a minimum of a day to complete; the time needed
for preparation (see section 16.3) and follow-up (see section 16.6) will be additional.
C(E)TRs may be carried out over more than one day if this better meets the person's
and their family's circumstances and is their preference.
4. The panel will meet everyone involved and set out the reason for holding the C(E)TR
and the principles of a C(E)TR. They will discuss and agree the plan for the day with
the current and future care team.
5. The review team will meet at the start of the day to discuss the plan for the day
and how they will manage the review, and to ensure they have a preliminary shared
knowledge of the person whose review it is. A one-page profile or similar 'pen
portrait' will be provided (a one-page profile template is available in the My C(E)TR
Planner booklet).
49
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
6. During the course of the day reviewers will meet the person whose care and treatment
is being reviewed unless the person does not want to or they lack capacity and it has
been assessed under the MCA that this is not in their best interests. This meeting
should be held in an environment the person feels comfortable in and they should be
supported by someone of their choice.
7. Reviewers will also meet the family unless they:
a do not wish to participate
b the person whose review it is has not consented to their involvement.
Where family members wish to be accompanied by their advocate, this should be
supported, subject to the consent of the person whose review it is and that the
purpose of support from an advocate is in line with the principles and spirit of C(E)TR.
If the person lacks capacity, a best interest decision will need to be taken on the
involvement of the family and a family advocate.
8. The person and their family should be offered the choice of attending the review
virtually, via secure video communication, rather than in person; this may be their
preference or more convenient to them, particularly if they would need to travel long
distances to attend in person. Meetings with them could also be held on a different
day from the review day if this is more convenient to them.
9. Participants' language and communication needs should be considered.
10. The responsible clinician, senior nurse, advocate (should the person have one) and
social care representatives must attend the review. For children and young people,
their keyworker and social care and education representatives must also attend.
Staff who provide direct day-to-day care and support to the individual, and often
know them best, should be present at the C(E)TR; the review will seek information on
specific diagnoses and formulations, including physical healthcare problems, the use of
medication and any restrictive practices.
Views and input from other relevant professionals should be sought if they cannot
attend in person.
11. For those people who have been admitted, the C(E)TR is not an inspection of the
mental health hospital. The review will seek a picture of the person's current inpatient
care - the ward they are on and an understanding of the therapeutic interventions
they are receiving.
50
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
12. Records will be reviewed (including care plans, person-centred plans, positive
behaviour support plans, medication cards, communication passports, CPA review
notes, health action plans, First Tier Tribunal reports). The service provider must
provide all relevant information at the beginning of the day and where possible in a
format that is clear to all members of the review team.
13. For those people who have been admitted, members of the 'aftercare' team should
be interviewed, eg community psychiatrist, community nurse, social worker, education
provider.
14. The review team will discuss with the wider professional team and the person whether
there are more appropriate, effective and safe alternatives to hospital admission, and
whether the person could be discharged from inpatient hospital care.
15. The review panel will meet everyone at the end of the review to present and discuss
their findings and recommendations, and clarify who should be named as having
responsibility for actioning each recommendation and within what timescale. The aim
is for people to leave C(E)TRs with an understanding of what will be implemented,
when and by whom, and how this will be followed up.
16. The chair is responsible for logging key findings and recommendations in the key lines
of enquiry (KLOE) report (see section 16.7).
17. Before concluding the review the chair will discuss with the panel what
communications additional to the circulation of the KLOE report may be needed after
the day (eg if a concern is raised, to confirm that action has been taken).
18. The chair is responsible for nominating the most appropriate person to feed back
the findings and recommendations to the person and/or their family in a format that
meets their communication needs. The KLOE report should be circulated within two
weeks of the review meeting.
19. Recommendations must be clear, time-limited, embedded and followed up through
local systems such as MDT meetings and ward rounds, and any responsibility for
action/escalation should be documented at the time of the C(E)TR.
20. The commissioner is responsible for raising and escalating any quality or safeguarding
concerns with relevant agencies, and where necessary the relevant host commissioner.
51
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
16.5.1 Considerations for children and young people - maintaining contact
between them and their families
People have a right to family life, and any period of admission and separation from family
and friends can be difficult and stressful for all involved, particularly when the person is
placed at a distance from their family and community. Children and young people must
be supported to maintain contact with their family, friends and local community. The
presumption should always be that families want to be in touch with their child and vice
versa.
Some families, especially those whose child or young person is placed at a distance, may
need financial help to visit their child. The provision of financial support to cover travel
costs should be considered at the community or post-admission CETR if admission is
agreed to be the appropriate option.
For children and young people who have communication impairments, particularly those
with speech impairments that make phone calls difficult, careful consideration should be
given to how contact can be supported, eg through use of media solutions such as Skype
or FaceTime.
For more information on the importance of maintaining contact, please refer to the
Keeping in Touch with Home report from the Challenging Behaviour Foundation and
Mencap.
The legal framework around maintaining contact between children and young people
and their families and communities is complex. Different legislation applies to different
statutory organisations.
The UN Convention of Rights of the Child (1989) article 9.3 states 'State Parties
shall respect the right of the child who is separated from one or both parents to
maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,
except if it is contrary to the child's best interest.'
The Mental Health Act 1983 Code of Practice (Section 19) sets out the
requirements to support families to be informed, involved and in touch with their child
or young person who is being assessed and treated.
Local authorities are under a duty in the Children Act 1989 (Schedule 2, paragraphs
10 and 15; and paragraphs 8A and 16) to promote contact between families and
children or young people who are children in need, who are looked after or who have
been living away from home because they have been admitted to hospital for three
months of more. They must help unite families if the authority's opinion is that this is
necessary to safeguard or promote the child or young person's welfare.
52
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
16.6 Following the review
1. The person, family members and involved professionals will receive a letter thanking
them for their involvement in the review process and clarifying how they will be kept
updated.
2. Review team members will be offered debriefing/support; for the expert by experience
this may be through a hub that supports their recruitment and training. Involvement in
a C(E)TR can be a difficult even traumatic experience and all team members must have
access to debriefing/support beyond the review day.
The commissioner is responsible for ensuring that:
the draft report is agreed by the review panel and sent to those involved in the C(E)
TR within two weeks (10 working days) of the C(E)TR taking place
the report is communicated in line with NHS Information Security requirements
the panel are provided with information about how they need to destroy any
personal information they have been given in the course of the review; the method
to be used will be discussed and agreed at the end of the review process
panel members have been provided with a code of conduct in the handling of
personal information and data that is subject to non-disclosure and requires secure
handling.
3. The chair will feed back required data to the local/regional team on the outcome.
4. Individuals named against specific recommendations in the C(E)TR report are
responsible for undertaking the agreed actions within the recorded timescales. Clinical
accountability for these actions sits with the responsible clinician.
5. The responsible commissioner must retain overall oversight of the action plan agreed
by the review panel. Where they have concerns that this is not being achieved, they
will use the relevant contract management processes and/or escalate their concerns to
the ICS oversight panel.
6. The commissioner will follow up any specific quality or safeguarding concerns the
C(E)TR has identified and ensure that these are raised as appropriate through local
reporting procedures and governance pathways, with feedback to the panel members
as appropriate.
7. The person and their family will be informed of progress on actions, including towards
discharge, by the commissioner or a nominated person (eg the keyworker).
8. The KLOE report (see section 16.7) will be submitted and stored securely as part of the
individual's medical record as agreed locally (by the commissioner).
53
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
9. Following either a planned or unplanned pre/post-admission C(E)TR, where the
outcome is admission to hospital, the individual must have a further C(E)TR within the
defined period set out in Table 2 above (or on request).
10. For follow-up C(E)TRs, the person should be consulted as to whether they would
prefer the same panel to undertake their next review. There may be some cases where
it is considered beneficial to have a different panel, although the individual's wishes
should be considered when deciding. If a panel does undertake a repeat C(E)TR for a
person, they must ensure each C(E)TR is person-centred, individualised and impartial.
16.7 Key lines of enquiry responsibilities
The C(E)TR should combine free discussion and exploration of significant care and
treatment issues at the same time as being based around a framework of important
themes and specific issues to be inquired after and, if necessary, challenged.
In common with the approach taken by the CQC, the C(E)TR policy uses key lines of
enquiry (KLOE) to guide and structure the review process alongside broader discussion
and decision-making.
The C(E)TR KLOE guide the review so the final report provides information and evidence
to enable a summary, and reflects to the person:
Am I safe?
What is my current care like?
What is my daily life like?
Are my physical health needs being met? (see section 16.9)
Is there a plan in place for my future?
Do I need to be in hospital for my care and treatment?
Each KLOE asks that relevant quotes from the individual and family are recorded to
capture a more personalised understanding of the person and their views.
Each KLOE consists of a main question followed by examples of probe questions that
reviewers can use to explore and gather information on the main issue. Each KLOE will
also suggest sources of evidence that the team might look or ask for to substantiate their
findings.
Though many KLOEs will apply across all people and settings, some of the probe
questions are specific to children, people in secure settings, in a non-secure hospital or in
the community.
The primary emphasis is on facilitating a comprehensive and focused discussion, not on
the completion of pre-determined specific questions.
54
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
16.8 Importance of advocacy
People should always be supported to self-advocate wherever possible, as listening to
people and their families, responding to their needs and choices, and ensuring people's
legal and human rights are upheld are integral to the DSR and C(E)TR processes.
A key underpinning principle of advocacy is that it is independent of all other statutory
and non-statutory services, including the service providing the person's care.
Independent arranged advocacy can include statutory advocacy - such as from an
independent Care Act advocate (ICAA), independent mental capacity advocate (IMCA)
or independent mental health advocate (IMHA) - general or community advocacy, and
advocacy provided by a self-advocacy organisation.
Statutory advocacy covers specific things (see Appendix 5), but people with a learning
disability and autistic people can also benefit from the support of peers (through a self-
advocacy organisation, for instance) or general advocacy, to provide ongoing rather than
episodic or issue-based support. The C(E)TR panel should feel confident to suggest this
where appropriate and use the C(E)TR to explore how it could be provided.
The responsible commissioner should ensure that the chosen advocate(s), regardless of
whether they are paid or unpaid, are invited to the C(E)TR and given adequate time to
plan and prepare for this, such as having enough time to spend with the person before
and after their C(E)TR, as well as on the day. Advocacy organisations will require adequate
notice of the C(E)TR for the advocate to support the individual to prepare for the C(E)TR. If
the person would like their advocate to be present for the whole C(E)TR, then this should
be made clear to the advocacy provider.
If advocacy is not provided as appropriate the C(E)TR panel should raise their concern
and make a specific recommendation to the person's commissioner and local authority to
ensure this is resolved as a matter of urgency.
See Appendix 5 for more information about C(E)TR statutory advocacy entitlements.
Accessible resources to support the person and their advocate can be found at
www.england.nhs.uk/my-ctr. Advocates can explore additional resources at
www.england.nhs.uk/learning-disabilities/care/ctr/commissioners
55
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
16.9 Importance of physical health
The C(E)TR review process must consider people's physical health needs on a par with
their mental health needs. People with a learning disability and autistic people are more
likely to die earlier than the general population and many of these deaths are avoidable
(LeDeR annual report 2021). The safe and wellbeing reviews also identified gaps in care in
relation to physical health and wellbeing.
The C(E)TR panel are in a unique position to review the physical healthcare the person is
receiving as well as the skills and experience of the staff supporting them. The physical
health section of the KLOE provides guidance on considering general physical wellbeing
and medication (including STOMP and STAMP).
The skills and experience of the panel are important in considering the physical health of
the person. It may be necessary to invite additional clinical experts to be part of the panel
if there are specific or complex physical health or medication needs.
56
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
17. Leaving hospital: the discharge
process and standards
Part of the C(E)TR's role is to ask whether people need to be in hospital for their care and
treatment, and to identify and find solutions that overcome barriers to discharge from
hospital.
As previously stated, the C(E)TR does not decide whether an individual is to be
discharged or not. This is the responsibility of the treating clinician (responsible clinician
for those detained under the MHA) and the decision will be taken through the usual
review processes. Generally, it is not appropriate for a discharge decision to wait for a
C(E)TR to first be convened.
However, what happens while a person is an inpatient lays the foundations for effective
discharge. The community or post-admission C(E)TR are therefore essential for setting
out clear treatment pathways and planning for discharge from the point of admission. It
may also be advisable to hold a post-discharge community C(E)TR to ensure that within
the community the recommendations made during the final inpatient C(E)TR are being
adequately followed up.
Discharging autistic people and people with a learning disability from hospital is not
always a straightforward process. Many factors can be barriers to or delay people leaving
hospital, including legal and financial issues, multi-agency disagreements or concerns
about supporting people whose behaviours are seen as 'higher risk' in the community,
lack of housing or disagreements over future plans.
Appendix 7 provides a 12-point discharge plan, and the C(E)TR code and toolkit provide
a set of discharge standards and a stepped model for discharge, to help commissioners
and all involved navigate this process, and enable a better experience for children, young
people and adults and their families.
It is a person's fundamental right to be fully involved in the planning for their discharge.
Information to help someone with this is included in the easy read independence pack.
57
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
18. Assurance and oversight: ICS
oversight panels
For many people, the C(E)TR process is helpful and supports their pathway, including
into hospital and discharge. However, we recognise that despite having regular C(E)TRs,
some people do not have an optimum experience: their length of stay can be long and/or
extremely restrictive, and occasionally their discharge is delayed.
The safe and wellbeing reviews introduced the concept of an ICS oversight panel to
oversee and scrutinise the reviews. System feedback is that this process is helpful and
supports the ICS and ICB in understanding their population and ensures they are sighted
on individuals who do not have good experiences; those who may be in the wrong place
or whose discharge is delayed.
We intend to maintain the concept of a senior level ICS oversight panel as part of the
C(E)TR process.
Each ICS must develop (or maintain) an oversight panel that includes:
learning disability and autism senior responsible officer/ICS named executive lead
at least one expert by experience
medical director
social care/local authority senior representative
provider collaborative representation
senior clinician with expertise in learning disability and autism.
Panels must convene at least quarterly (more frequently if helpful) and should review the
C(E)TRs of people for whom concern has been expressed. This group must include, but is
not exclusive to, people:
with long stays:
for children and young people, with a stay of six months or longer
for adults, with a stay 12 months or longer (unless restricted by MoJ)
in long-term segregation or who are regularly secluded or subject to very restrictive
practices
who are placed in units or wards that CQC rates as inadequate
who have made complaints about care, or their family has, and these have not been
resolved to the satisfaction of all involved
for whom a safeguarding referral has been made
who have requested escalation or their family has
where the responsible clinician has requested escalation
where the responsible commissioner has requested escalation
where the advocate has requested escalation
who have declined a C(E)TR on two or more occasions.
58
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
The ICS oversight panel should review the C(E)TR report and actions, assure themselves
that the person is safe and well, and consider if any further action is needed to support
the person's progress or discharge.
The panel should specifically consider:
the care and treatment the person is receiving
the person's physical health and wellbeing
the person's safety; including to confirm appropriate measures have been taken in
response to any safeguarding concerns
for those whose discharge is delayed, whether all partners are working to support
discharge as soon as possible
for those subject to significant restrictions, whether measures are in place to reduce
these as soon as possible
for those considered to have been placed in the wrong environment, whether
mitigating safeguards are in place to support their care and wellbeing
whether the person's human rights are being upheld.
ICS oversight panels should also:
take into account all quality assurance intelligence regarding the commissioner service,
such as host commissioner reports and safeguarding information
take ownership of any actions that may be needed as the result of a review
escalate any issues that cannot be addressed at the ICS level to the relevant regional
team
evidence how review findings feed into the ICS delivery plan.
59
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
19. CETR alignment with other assessment and
review processes for children and young people
Children and young people with a learning disability and autistic children and young
people and their families are likely to experience a myriad of assessment and review
processes through their life. Many of these assessment and review processes have similar
principles: multi-agency, person-centred and outcome focused.
Given the bespoke purpose of a CETR, other assessments or reviews should not usually
take place at the same time. However, as much of the information collected for and
discussed in a CETR will be useful for other review processes (eg EHC review) and many
of the individuals involved in a CETR will take part in other reviews, the sharing of this
information should be considered, for efficiency and particularly to avoid repetition for
the person. Discussions in a CETR may also lead to a need for other assessments or plan
reviews, eg child in need plans or EHCPs.
Below is a non-exhaustive list of the assessments or plans that children and young people
may already have in place:
Special Educational Needs (SEN) support
Some children and young people may have a special educational need that can be
supported through the SEN provision provided in a mainstream school placement.
Children and young people who are receiving SEN support should still have an
assessment and plan in place as to how their special educational needs will be met
in school (SEND_Code_of_Practice_January_2015). This is managed through the
school rather than the local authority. Children and young people whose needs
cannot be met through SEN support usually require an assessment for an EHCP.
CETRs should involve education representatives from the child or young person's
local authority responsible for their educational provision as well as someone from
their current education provider (school/college/pupil referral unit).
Education, health and care plans (EHCPs)
Education, health and care assessments and planning is the statutory assessment
and planning process for children and young people with special educational
and disability needs that cannot be met through SEN support. This process is not
replaced in any way by the CETR but this may provide an opportunity to determine
the need to review the EHCP, or to initiate an EHC assessment.
CETRs should involve representatives from the child or young person's local authority
responsible for their educational provision as well as someone from their current
education provider.
60
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Children's social care assessment and review
Children and young people and their families may have been assessed by and be in
receipt of services or provision from social care.
Disabled children and young people are considered to be 'children in need' under
s17(10) of the Children Act 1989. This entitles them to an assessment as a child
in need. Local authorities will have their own eligibility criteria in relation to their
services for children in need, and their disabled children's services. Some children
and young people, after having an assessment of need, may not be considered to
meet the threshold for service provision and may not be known further to social
care. If a child or young person is receiving a service from the local authority, this
will mean they have had an assessment of need, and it has been determined they
do meet the threshold for provision, and are being provided with service(s) that will
be being reviewed.
Services may be provided under a range of different legislation, depending on
the nature and type of provision. For some children and young people receiving
regular overnight short break, or shared care support, this may be provided under
either s17 or s20 of the Children Act 1989. If provision is provided under s20 of the
Children Act 1989, then the child will also be considered a looked after child (LAC)
and will have regular LAC or child in care reviews.
Section 17(ZA) of the Children Act 1989 requires local authorities to assess whether
young carers within their area have support needs and if so, what those needs are.
Section 17(ZD) of the Children Act 1989 requires local authorities to assess (if
certain conditions are met) whether a parent carer within their area has support
needs and if so, what those needs are.
Some children and young people may be known to the local authority because of
safeguarding concerns, or because there is a child protection plan in place. If this is
the case, then regular case conferences will be taking place to review the plan.
61
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
20. Disagreements, escalation of concerns
and complaints about the C(E)TR process
20.1 Concerns about lack of engagement from necessary partners
A successful C(E)TR requires meaningful engagement and participation from all agencies
involved in the care, treatment, support and education of the individual. The urgent
nature of many C(E)TRs, particularly community C(E)TRs, may make it challenging for
agencies to participate and engage fully, but unless they do the development of a clear
plan that best supports the person is unlikely.
The ICS should consider how it will manage situations where key partner agencies are
unable or unwilling to engage and participate. Each ICB will have a lead for learning
disability and autism, a lead for children and young people and a lead for mental health.
Their support should be sought in developing local protocols that enable effective
partnerships and manage challenges.
20.2 Clinical disagreements
Clinical disagreement about the appropriate pathway for a person must be resolved
before planning decisions are made. Local reconciliation panels should be used or set up.
These should be chaired by a clinical director (medical or nursing) from the local or NHS
England team, and comprise the individual's responsible clinician, the clinical expert on
the C(E)TR panel and an independent clinical expert.
20.3 Disagreements about who is responsible for providing care
Disagreements between parties about responsibility for future packages of care should
be escalated to the relevant senior offices to resolve, including the director of nursing
or chief clinical officer and relevant social care senior director. This is required to prevent
the disagreement leading to a lengthy inpatient stay where an individual is ready for
discharge (leading to a delayed transfer of care).
20.4 Escalation of concerns
Concerns may be raised by anyone - the person, their family and professionals. Concerns
may be about:
staff members:
their conduct, including their use of physical or chemical restraint
competency in providing person-centred care
quality of their documentation
environmental conditions, eg:
lack of personalised accommodation
lack of appropriate environmental stimuli
lack of resource to meet a person's needs, eg:
inability to access a social environment
inability to meet physical health needs through attending primary and secondary care
62
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
inappropriate restriction of contact between a child or young person and their family
and/or friends.
For concerns about the quality or safety of a service and/or provider, the C(E)TR chair or
responsible commissioner should:
note them in the relevant area of the KLOE report, and record the actions being taken
feed these back to the review attendees, including family and reviewers
ensure relevant data is appropriately captured and reported
raise any concerns with the appropriate organisation/individual, eg the provider, CQC,
local authority lead commissioner for establishment, as well as local forums, and ensure
relevant paperwork is completed and actions are taken to ensure maintenance of high
quality care
ensure they are shared through the relevant NHS England or ICS internal reporting
mechanisms, such as quality surveillance groups (QSGs), to ensure that where an area is
commissioned by several commissioners relevant concerns are shared appropriately.
The relevant route to escalate concerns will depend on the nature of the concern (or
disagreement) but routes include:
CQC
local authority safeguarding team
ICS contracting team
provider collaborative lead
local NHS QSGs
NHS England contracting team
Ofsted.
20.5 Complaints relating to the C(E)TR process
Complaints from a person, their family or providers about the C(E)TR process will be dealt
with in line with usual NHS complaints processes.
The first point of contact for complaints or concerns should usually be the C(E)TR chair
(or the responsible commissioner in the event they are the delegated chair). They should
seek to resolve any issues and agree any remedial actions.
If they cannot do so, the concern/complaint should be escalated as set out in the local
NHS policy. This will be made available to the people attending the C(E)TR.
Where complaints are not resolved to the satisfaction of all concerned parties, the person
should be referred to the ICS oversight panel for review (see section 18).
Information to support people with a learning disability, autistic people, their family or
carers to make a complaint are available through the Ask Listen Do project.
63
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
21. Roles and responsibilities - provider and
commissioning functions
21.1 Provider collaboratives (provider function)
Providers have existing responsibilities set out in the C(E)TR policy. These are:
Ensure that the C(E)TR process is implemented as set out in this policy; this includes
engaging with the community C(E)TR carried out before admission (unless the risk of
delaying admission by doing so is deemed too great).
Work in partnership with:
ICSs and commissioners to facilitate C(E)TRs
people, their family, carers and partners before, during and after the C(E)TR
local authorities to deliver discharge/transfer plans.
Support people with a learning disability and/or autistic people and their families
through the C(E)TR process, including by promoting their understanding of the review
process, and with consent and best interests as appropriate, by ensuring adequate time
and preparation for this.
Implement agreed relevant C(E)TR recommendations; take actions from C(E)TRs into
ward rounds/other clinical meetings.
Use learning from C(E)TRs and the independent opinion to improve the quality of the
services they provide.
Audit the C(E)TR process and outcomes, and people's experiences of C(E)TRs.
Act on relevant concerns flagged by a C(E)TR and report actions back to the panel
chair, the person and their family.
Challenge any blockages the C(E)TR identifies that are the result of funding or
community barriers outside the provider's control.
21.2 Provider collaborative - NHS lead provider (commissioning
function)
Ensure that people who are entitled to a C(E)TR have been added to the DSR.
Ensure that all providers within the collaborative are aware of the C(E)TR policy and
their responsibilities.
Ensure adherence with agreed guidance and standards, with specific responsibility for
ensuring completion of the post-admission and repeat C(E)TRs in line with policy.
Chair the C(E)TR or delegate authority to an appropriately recruited chair.
Facilitate access to clinical experts and experts by experience to C(E)TRs in line with the
policy.
Ensure any immediate actions resulting from reviews are followed up.
Track and monitor delivery of C(E)TR recommended discharge/transfer plans.
Take an active role in the community C(E)TR carried out before admission (unless the
risk of delaying admission by doing so is deemed too great).
64
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Ensure that a quality assurance process is in place for monitoring delivery and
implementation of C(E)TR recommendations - providing assurance to the regional
team.
Respond to concerns escalated on an individual C(E)TR basis or where C(E)TR
intelligence highlights broader concerns.
21.3 NHS England regional teams
Maintain an overview of concerns raised by C(E)TRs, including those that have resulted
in alerts to safeguarding and CQC through ICS oversight panels.
Respond to escalated concerns relating to a multi-site independent sector provider for
which the region has oversight responsibility.
Ensure that a quality assurance process is in place for monitoring delivery and
implementation of C(E)TR recommendations - providing assurance to the national
team.
21.4 Local authorities (adults and children)
Ensure the local area engages in C(E)TRs for local children, young people and adults
known to them.
Ensure any allocated actions resulting from reviews are followed up and reported on.
Work in partnership with ICSs/NHS England to enable successful implementation of
policy and guidance.
Ensure any allocated actions resulting from reviews are followed up and reported on.
Ensure where the person lacks capacity and is being discharged into the community
with a comprehensive care plan that this follows the deprivation of liberty (DoL)
safeguards authorisation process.
65
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
22. Glossary
Approved mental
Mental health professional who has received specific
health professional
training in the legal aspects of mental health assessment
and treatment and been approved by a authority to carry
out certain duties under the Mental Health Act.
Clinical expert
Someone with a relevant health professional qualification
and active registration with a relevant professional body.
They should also hold professional indemnity insurance that
covers them to practise on an independent basis.
Dynamic support
Dynamic support describes a range of personalised support
and services that are flexible and respond to the changing
needs of a person and their family to avoid inappropriate
admission to a mental health hospitals.
Dynamic support
Dynamic support processes are the pathways to provide
processes
timely and multi-agency dynamic support to children and
adults who are autistic, have a learning disability or both
and their families/carers, to provide support that reduces
escalation into crises, to support in times of crises and to
avoid inappropriate admission to a mental health hospital.
Dynamic support
The register a local area uses to identify individual children,
register (DSR)
young people and adults with a learning disability, autism or
both who are at risk or may become at risk of admission to
a mental health inpatient setting without specific and timely
dynamic support.
The original name for this - at risk of admission register -
continues to be used in some areas. In some areas the DSR
is known as the dynamic support database (DSD).
Dynamic support
Dynamic support systems are the way in which different
systems
people, teams and organisations work together to deliver
dynamic support and services in a timely and person-centred
way to children, young people and adults who need them
and their families.
Expert by experience
Someone with relevant personal lived experience or a family
member of someone with relevant lived experience.
66
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Keyworker
A named keyworker for all people with a clearer
multidisciplinary team (MDT) approach to both assess and
meet the needs of people, to reduce the reliance on care
co-ordinators and to increase resilience in systems of care,
allowing all staff to make the best use of their skills and
qualifications, and drawing on new roles including lived
experience roles. (Not to be confused with the children and
young people's keyworker scheme - see below.)
Children and young
By March 2024, all children and young people with a
people's keyworker
learning disability, autism or both at risk of admission to a
mental health hospital or in hospital should have a named
keyworker. This keyworker should always be invited to
attend the CETR. Keyworkers can play an important part
in the arrangement, delivery and follow-up of CETRs,
particularly by supporting links with and strengthening the
role of education in CETRs where children and young people
are not in school.
Key lines of enquiry
Framework for C(E)TRs, outlining areas of assessment, need
(KLOE)
and challenge.
Long-term segregation
A situation where, to reduce a sustained risk of harm posed
(LTS)
by the patient to others, which is a constant feature of their
presentation, a multidisciplinary review and a representative
from the responsible commissioning authority determine
that a patient should not be allowed to mix freely with other
patients on the ward or unit on a long-term basis (Mental
Health Act 1983)
Place
A geographical area within an ICS that works to join up
budgets, planning and service delivery for health and care
services. The boundaries of a place are often co-terminous
with local authority boundaries.
Responsible clinician
The clinician with overall responsibility for the care and
treatment of a patient who is being assessed and treated
under the Mental Health Act.
67
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Responsible
The individual representing the responsible organisation
commissioner
paying for the services a person receives.
This can be the ICB, a provider collaborative or NHS
England.
Stop The Over-
The Over-Medication of People with a Learning Disability,
Medication of People
Autism or both (STOMP)
Launched by NHS England and
with a Learning
the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health in 2018 to
Disability, Autism or
support the appropriate use of medication and specifically
both (STOMP)
stop the inappropriate use of psychotropic medication for
autistic people and people with a learning disability.
Supporting Treatment
Launched by NHS England and the Royal College of
and Appropriate
Paediatrics and Child Health in 2018 to support the
Medication in
appropriate use of medication and stop the inappropriate
Paediatrics (STAMP)
use of psychotropic medication for autistic children and
children with a learning disability.
Unpaid carer
Anyone, including children, who looks after a family
member, partner or friend who needs help because of
their illness, frailty, disability, a mental health problem or an
addiction and cannot cope without their support, and is not
paid for the care they give.
68
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Appendices
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Appendix 1: Factors that may place someone at
risk of admission to a mental health hospital
Note: This is not an exhaustive list.
Increasing and unstable/untreated mental illness.
Significant behaviours that challenge.
Pain or distress from physical health issues (both diagnosed and undiagnosed).
History of admission(s).
Presenting 'in crisis' at A&E department.
Not previously known to learning disability services.
Supported in an unstable environment or by a changing staff team.
Recently discharged from a long-stay hospital bed.
In acute ward settings with mental health needs, including disordered eating/avoidant
restrictive food intake disorders.
Undiagnosed in a mental health hospital but may receive a diagnosis during their
admission.
No effectively planned transition from child to adult learning disability services.
No fixed address.
No family carers/advocates.
Family carer crisis/breakdown.
Family showing increasing concern and challenge to ensure needs that prevent a mental
health crisis are being met.
Drug and/or alcohol addiction.
Subject to the Mental Health Act, deprivation of liberty (DoL) safeguards or liberty
protection safeguards (LPS).
In contact with the criminal justice system.
In receipt of services from youth offending teams.
In receipt of continuing healthcare funding.
Significant life event and/or change, such as bereavement or abuse.
Some factors may have been heightened by the COVID-19 pandemic and associated
response.
These factors will not necessarily lead to inclusion on DSRs but should be carefully
considered alongside other identified needs.
The C(E)TR policy previously identified children and young people in 52-week residential
schools as being at particular risk of admission to a mental health hospital; these children
should now be routinely included on DSRs.
70
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Appendix 2: Cheshire and Wirral Partnership dynamic
support database clinical support tool - adult and child
Name:
NHS
Cheshire and Wirral
NHS Number:
Partnership
NHS Foundation Trust
Dynamic Support Database Adult - Risk rating tool
Question
Options
Possible
Risk
Details/
Score
score
comments
Type of Accommodation
Hospital
Living independently
Living with parents/carers
Nursing home
Residential accommodation
Supported living
Other
Name of current provider
Deprivation of Liberty (DOLS)
Yes
No
Court of Protection
Yes
No
Any significant life events in
Yes
2
the last 6 months? If so
No
0
please specify details.
Does the person have an
Yes
3
unstable or untreated mental
No
0
health condition?
Does the person have an
Yes
2
unstable or untreated
No
0
physical health condition?
Has the person had previous
Yes
1
admissions in the last 2
No
0
years?
Date of previous admissions
Does the person present
Yes
3
significant behavioural
No
0
problems?
Is the person being
Yes
3
supported in an unstable
No
0
environment or by changing
staff team?
Is the person previously
Yes
known to CLDT?
No
Is the person in contact with
Yes
2
the criminal justice system?
No
0
71
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Has the person presented in
Yes
2
crisis as Accident and
No
0
Emergency in the last month?
Does the person have
Yes
family/carers/advocates?
No
Does the person have a
Alcohol
2
history of Drug or Alcohol
Drugs
2
misuse in the last two years?
Both
2
Neither
0
Was the person's transition
No
1
from children's services
Yes
0
effective in the last 12
Not applicable
0
months?
Is the person placed in
Yes
1
specialist 52-week residential
No
0
school?
Has the person been recently
Yes
2
discharged from long stay in
No
0
hospital in the last 2 years?
(Long stay is considered to be
6 months or more).
Total
0-4=
Green
5-7=
Amber
8+ =
Red
Local area emergency protocol
If admission cannot be
If other please specify name
avoided where will admission
and address
take place?
MDT Meeting Date
Avoidance Admission
Meeting Date
Community Care and
Treatment Review Date
Revised RAG Rating
Post Admission Care and
Admission Date
Treatment Review Date
Planned Discharge Date
Actual Discharge Date
Completed by
Completed by (Clinician)
Date Completed
Copyright© CWP NHS Foundation Trust (2019). All rights reserved.
Not to be reproduced in whole or in part without prior permission from the copyright owner.
72
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Name:
NHS
Cheshire and Wirral
NHS Number:
Partnership
NHS Foundation Trust
Dynamic Support Database Clinical Support Tool (Child)
Question
Options
Possible
Risk
Details/
Score
score
comments
Type of Accommodation
Hospital
Living independently
Living with parents/carers
Nursing home
Residential accommodation
Supported living
Other
Name of current provider
Deprivation of Liberty (DOLS)
Yes
No
Is the CYP of CIN, CP, or LAC
Yes
Status?
No
Any significant life events in
Yes
2
the last 6 months? If so
No
0
please specify details.
Does the CYP have an
Yes
3
unstable or untreated mental
No
0
health condition?
Does the CYP have an
Yes
2
unstable or untreated
No
0
physical health condition?
Has the CYP had previous
Yes
1
admissions in the last 2
No
0
years?
Date of previous admissions
Does the CYP present
Yes
3
significant behavioural
No
0
problems?
Is the CYP being supported in
Yes
3
an unstable environment or
No
0
by a changing staff team?
Is the CYP previously known
Yes
to LD-CAMHS/CAMHS?
No
Is the CYP in contact with the
Yes
2
criminal justice system?
No
0
Has the CYP presented in
Yes
2
crisis at either: Accident and
No
0
Emergency, or Emergency
Social Care Provision in the
last month?
73
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Does the CYP have
Yes
family/carers/advocates?
No
Does the CYP have a history
Alcohol
2
of Drug or Alcohol misuse, in
Drugs
2
the last two years?
Both
2
Neither
0
Has the transition from LD-
No
1
CAMHS/CAMHS to
Yes
0
CLDT/AMHT started and if so
Not applicable
0
has it been effective?
Is the CYP placed in specialist
Yes
1
38 or 52 week residential
No
0
school or other specialist
educational provision?
Has the CYP recently left a
Yes
2
residential school in the last 2
No
0
years?
Total
0 - 4 = Green
5 - 7 =
Amber
8+ =Red
Local area emergency protocol
If admission cannot be
If other please specify name
avoided where will admission
and address
take place?
MDT Meeting Date
Avoidance Admission
Meeting Date
Care, Education and
Treatment Review Date
Revised RAG Rating
Post Admission Care and
Admission Date
Treatment Review Date
Planned Discharge Date
Actual Discharge Date
Completed by
Completed by (Clinician)
Date Completed
Copyright© CWP NHS Foundation Trust (2019). All rights reserved.
Not to be reproduced in whole or in part without prior permission from the copyright owner.
74
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Appendix 3: C(E)TR principles and standards
These standards support the implementation of the C(E)TR policy, in the community and in
hospital. The C(E)TR code and toolkit sets these out with additional criteria that support best
practice.
The panel members need to familiarise themselves with the principles and standards and hold
each other to account on these. Additionally, the standards will form the basis for quality
assurance activity.
Principle 1 - Person-centred and family centred
Standard 1.1 The person and their family will be given information about the C(E)TR in advance.
Standard 1.2 Before a C(E)TR, the responsible commissioner will ensure that the person has given
consent or if the person lacks capacity, that a best interests decision has been made.
Standard 1.3 The person will be supported to get ready for the C(E)TR using the 'My Care
(Education) and Treatment Review' and 'My C(E)TR Planner' booklets.
Standard 1.4 Reasonable adjustments should be made to the C(E)TR process as required to
ensure that the person is fully involved, present and able to participate as they wish.
Standard 1.5 The panel will make time available to meet separately with the person and their
family carer. This could be meeting them all together or separately according to the person's
wishes.
Standard 1.6 Following a C(E)TR the person and their family are supported to understand what
will happen next.
Principle 2 - Evidence based
Standard 2.1 C(E)TRs use a standardised, structured approach to the review of a person's care by
using specifically designed key lines of enquiry (KLOE).
Standard 2.2 The C(E)TR will look for evidence to support its findings and note these on the
KLOE template.
Standards 2.3 Specifically, the C(E)TR will look for evidence that clinical and best practice
guidance has been followed; this will be recorded on the KLOE template.
Standard 2.4 Information to help answer the KLOEs will be gathered together before the C(E)TR
takes place.
75
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Principle 3 - Rights led
Standard 3.1 Where there is concern that the person's human rights may not be being upheld
appropriately this will be identified on the KLOE template and relevant action taken.
Standard 3.2 The C(E)TR will ask about the provision of advocacy for the person and ensure any
recommendations are included in the KLOE document.
Standard 3.3 The C(E)TR will ask about legal representation for the person (eg at tribunals).
Principle 4 - Seeing the whole person
Standard 4.1 Each C(E)TR should take a minimum of a day to complete. There may be occasions
where the review takes place over more than one day to ensure that the needs of the person are
taken into account.
Standard 4.2 The C(E)TR will include the people who are important to the person being
reviewed.
Standard 4.3 People who are, or who will be, supporting the person should be part of the C(E)TR
- including local authority representation and advocacy.
Standard 4.4 The review will ask about physical health, mental health and quality of daily life.
Principle 5 — Open, independent and challenging
Standard 5.1 The review panel is made up of three people and will include: chair (the person's
commissioner or person with delegated authority by the commissioner); and two independent
advisers - an expert by experience and a clinical expert.
Standard 5.2 The chair should be able to demonstrate that they have worked in partnership with
the panel members including agreement on the content of the report.
Standard 5.3 The C(E)TR panel will ensure that they have provided basic information about
themselves to the person (eg name and photograph) and introduced themselves fully when they
meet the person.
Standard 5.4 Where a C(E)TR panel does not reach agreement, the differing opinions will be
noted in the KLOE template.
Standard 5.5 The chair will ensure at the beginning that everybody who takes part knows what a
C(E)TR is about.
Standard 5.6 The review team will have completed mandatory C(E)TR training.
Standard 5.7 The panel members will all declare if they have any conflicts of interest.
Standard 5.8 The C(E)TR will ensure that the reasons for, and the expected outcomes of, an
admission/continued admission are clearly recorded.
76
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Standard 5.9 The C(E)TR will question aspects of care and treatment that are not consistent with
good practice or evidence-based guidelines.
Standard 5.10 The C(E)TR will keep asking whether the person's care and treatment could be
delivered in a non-hospital setting.
Standard 5.11 A follow-up C(E)TR will always check why any actions previously agreed have not
been carried out.
Principle 6 — Nothing about us without us
Standard 6.1 Every person will be supported to fully engage in their own C(E)TR wherever
possible, considering how the person is supported to use their preferred method and/or tools of
communication.
Standard 6.2 At the C(E)TR a person will be identified who will communicate the progress on
actions to the person and their family/carers following the C(E)TR.
Standard 6.3 Following the C(E)TR, the commissioner will write a report about the review in
words that all involved can understand. The commissioner will make sure the person, their family/
carers and others who need a copy get the report within two weeks.
Principle 7 — Action focused
Standard 7.1 C(E)TRs check that people are safe. When a C(E)TR finds that people may not be
safe, the chair will discuss this with the person, record on the KLOE template and raise concerns
to the relevant authority or agency.
Standard 7.2 The C(E)TR will identify gaps in the person's care and treatment. The panel will
make SMART recommendations to address these gaps in order to ensure appropriate treatment
and discharge plans are in place.
Standard 7.3 The person's keyworker will make sure that the outcome of the C(E)TR is reflected
in their relevant care plan and will be followed through within the planning process.
Standard 7.4 The outcomes of the C(E)TR will identify the named individuals in the person's
care team who will make sure the C(E)TR recommendations are embedded in other relevant
assessment and planning processes along with clear timescales, for example education, health and
care plan; children in need plans, risk assessments, etc.
Standard 7.5 C(E)TRs will identify whether long-term planning to support discharge (eg housing
or where bespoke care packages may be required) is being considered and planned for at the
earliest opportunity including the engagement of competent service providers.
Standard 7.6 The commissioner is accountable for follow-up after a C(E)TR and ensuring
recommended actions are being carried out on time. Where actions are not carried out, the
commissioner will explain to the person and their family why this is.
77
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
SMART recommendations mean that the recommendations should be:
Specific
What exactly should happen and the name of the person responsible for
ensuring that it is carried out.
Measurable
How will people know if the recommendation has been implemented
satisfactorily?
Action-focused
Recommendations should be in the form of clear tasks to be carried out by
named persons.
Realistic
Recommendations have to be possible to achieve not merely aspirational or
outside the remit or capabilities of the persons named.
Time-framed
There should be a specific stated date by which the recommendation is to
have been implemented or reviewed.
Principle 8 - Living life in the community
Standard 8.1 A record of the reasons why the person's care and treatment cannot be carried out
in the community will be made on the KLOE, where this is the outcome of a C(E)TR.
Standard 8.2 The C(E)TR will look for evidence of up-to-date, positive and proactive risk
assessment and risk management plans that address the safety of the person and of others now
and in the future.
Standard 8.3 The C(E)TR will ask about the person's circle of support and how the person is
being enabled to be part of their local community (including any advocacy provision).
78
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Appendix 4: C(E)TR — sit and see observation
Reviewing the service and environment: The following questions can be used to identify
any potential causes for concern regarding quality and safety of the service.
The environment
Methods for gathering this information
The following KLOEs can be captured during a commissioner oversight visit or a one-off
quality visit by a team of individuals to support these reviews.
Most sit and see visits should last no less than three hours - to ensure a meaningful overview
of the setting and care can be gathered.
Ref:
The following questions have been
Comments
Actions
taken from the NHS England: The 15 Step
taken
Challenge
2.1
Using your senses - Consider what can I hear,
smell, see, feel, touch?
How does this ward/unit make me feel, how
does it smell?
What is the atmosphere like?
What interactions are there between staff/
patients/visitors?
Is there visible information that is useful and re-
assuring to people? What is it?
What have I noticed that builds my confidence
and trust that this is a safe and welcoming
environment?
What makes me less confident?
Things to look out for
Welcoming reception area.
Welcome signs (including accessible signage).
Acknowledgement on arrival - eye contact,
smiles, a greeting.
Information available, clear and visible.
Contact information for relatives and visitors is
visible.
Visiting times are evident.
Information about who the staff team are and
who the ward manager is.
Is there evidence that the ward is accessible
including easy read information being available?
79
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
2.2
Safety
What do I notice about safety issues?
Do staff on this ward appear to think that safety
is important?
What information tells me about the quality of
care here?
What tells me that staff are concerned about
safety and preventing harm (eg infections, falls)?
How are medicines managed on the ward?
What have I noticed that builds my confidence
about safety on this ward?
What makes me less confident?
Does the service use CCTV?
Is the environment well maintained, what
condition is the environment in, including the
bedrooms and bathrooms?
Things to look out for
A clean and well-maintained environment.
Hand gels are available and used.
Clear information about infection prevention
and control and evidence of staff implementing
procedures.
Rubbish/dirty items and linen are disposed of
appropriately and not visible.
Food in fridges is within expiry date.
Can I see information that says the ward is
improving in identified areas? Is the information
clear and understandable?
Equipment and environment appear to be well
maintained.
Protected times/areas for staff to manage drugs
and essential equipment.
Support offered to people who require assistance
with eating.
Patients always have access to drinks.
Security and fire procedures are evident.
80
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
2.3
Caring and involving
What behaviours can I see that do or do not
inspire confidence?
Do staff appear to know their patients well?
How have the staff made me feel?
What can I understand about patient experience
on this ward/unit?
Are there any indicators that patients and carers
are involved in their own care?
How is dignity and privacy being respected?
How are staff interacting with patients (eg do
they talk in lower tones when having private
conversations)?
Can I observe good team working taking place?
Is people's clothing in good condition?
Things to look out for
Staff are communicating and interacting
positively with patients.
Staff are always available for patients.
Patient feedback is displayed.
Patients are dressed to protect their dignity.
Information for patients and carers is available in
a clear and user-friendly format.
Information that empowers patients (eg to
choose their own meals, day activities).
Signs that equality/diversity needs are being met
and reasonable adjustments implemented.
Visitors have access to chairs and space to visit.
Information about how to complain and
compliment is visible and in an accessible format.
Signage for how to access advocacy is visible and
in an accessible format.
81
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
2.4
Well organised and calm
Does the ward/unit feel calm or chaotic (even if
it is busy)?
Is essential information about each patient
available for staff?
Does the unit/ward look well organised, clean
and uncluttered?
Things to look out for
An uncluttered, clean environment, including
nurses' station/office, hallways and communal
areas.
Clear accessible signage to rooms, toilets, etc.
Well maintained, appropriate (eg non-slip), clean
condition of walls, floors, windows and ceiling.
Staff have easy access to patient information: it
is visible and organised. There is a transparent
and communal information board located in the
office (eg patient status at a glance board).
Patient boards show evidence of co-ordination
between different departments.
Equipment stored tidily and is managed, eg
colour-coded, staff return equipment after use,
stock cupboards are clearly labelled - including
visible management (photos of content).
82
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Appendix 5: C(E)TR advocacy entitlements
Advocacy and C(E)TRs
We have updated the policy in relation to advocacy in light of a review of inpatient advocacy for
people with a learning disability and autistic people carried out in 2021/22.
The first principle is that people should always be supported to self-advocate whenever possible,
as listening to people and their families, responding to their needs and choices and ensuring
people's legal and human rights are upheld are integral to the C(E)TR process. Independent
advocacy has a vital role in ensuring all of this happens - whether the person is living in the
community and at risk of admission, is an inpatient or has left hospital.
The person's views, wishes and preferences must be central in decision-making and people's
preferred communication methods should be respected. This means that if people do not use
words to express themselves, advocates and others involved in their C(E)TR must still do all they
can to understand how the person is communicating their experience of their care, treatment and
for children and young people, their education. If the person's 'voice' is not being heard, the panel
should explore how they can be supported to express their wishes and make relevant decisions,
not just in relation to their C(E)TR.
Family carers can be advocates too
Many people choose a family member to advocate with or for them, and where a person lacks
capacity to make decisions, this is especially important as a family member may understand their
relative's communication better than anyone else.
Where a family member is an advocate, the C(E)TR should explore whether that person feels
adequately supported in their role, providing an appropriate recommendation if not, eg the
provision of a family advocate, steps to improve how the person's formal advocate and family
member work together, or steps to improve how the service perceives and supports the family
member's advocacy role.
People can and at times should have an advocate who is paid to be their advocate (see below) as
well as family members advocating for them - this can work really well.
Having a family member who is an advocate is generally not a reason to withhold arranged
independent advocacy, which is often a statutory entitlement.
If the person has chosen not engage with an advocate, the C(E)TR panel should also explore this
closely to ensure the person is supported to understand the many benefits of doing so, and that
their rights to advocacy are being communicated and upheld.
Accessible resources to support the person and their advocate can be found at www.england.
nhs.uk/my-ctr. Advocates can explore additional resources at www.england.nhs.uk/learning-
disabilities/care/ctr/commissioners/.
83
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Independent advocacy
A key underpinning principle of advocacy is that it is independent of all other statutory and non-
statutory services, including the service providing the person's care.
Independent arranged advocacy can include statutory advocacy - such as independent Care Act
advocacy (ICAA), independent mental capacity advocacy (IMCA) or independent mental health
advocacy (IMHA) - general or community advocacy, and advocacy provided by a self-advocacy
organisation. Please see below for a summary of statutory entitlements.
Statutory advocacy covers very specific things, but people with a learning disability and autistic
people can also benefit greatly from the support of peers (through a self-advocacy organisation,
for instance) or general advocacy, to provide ongoing rather than episodic or issue-based support.
The panel should feel confident to suggest this where appropriate and use the C(E)TR to explore
how it could be provided.
The panel chair should ensure that the chosen advocate(s), regardless of whether they are paid
or unpaid, are invited to the C(E)TR and given adequate time to plan and prepare for this, such
as having enough time to spend with the person before and after their C(E)TR, as well as on the
day. Advocacy organisations will require adequate notice of the C(E)TR (at least a month ideally) to
allocate the advocate, for the advocate to get to know the person if necessary and then support
them to prepare for the C(E)TR. A specific time slot on the day should be offered if the advocate
cannot be present for the whole C(E)TR.
If the person would like their advocate to be present for the whole C(E)TR, then this should be
made clear to the advocacy provider.
In the community
Consideration of the need for, and access to, advocacy services is vital for all age groups, not
least for children and young people and their families, who may have no experience of the
hospital system, the legal system or their legal rights. This is as relevant when admission is being
considered as when a person is in hospital.
Discussions around the person and family's support needs in relation to a community C(E)TR
should consider the person's advocacy needs given the person's risk of being admitted to hospital.
Ideally, these needs should be reviewed before a community C(E)TR takes place, such as when the
person is identified on the DSR, so that the person has advocacy support during their C(E)TR. This
will support the person's understanding of and involvement in the C(E)TR process and the aim of
avoiding admission whenever possible. It should also support family carer involvement whenever
possible.
Where admission to hospital is likely, the community C(E)TR can help to describe the advocacy
support the person will need throughout this and following discharge.
While a right to statutory advocacy to support people in their community C(E)TR is clearly
desirable, it is not currently explicit in the legislation or relevant codes of practice that this must
be done for a C(E)TR (save for certain exceptions where an advocate must be appointed for other
reasons - see statutory entitlements below).
84
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
However, best practice would be to allow for a positive and flexible approach to supporting
people in this situation with either access to an ICAA or IMHA. Care Act advocates may get
involved if the C(E)TR as a result of a care and support assessment, care and support planning
process, care and support review or a safeguarding enquiry. They are able to provide support if the
care and support process may lead to a stay in an NHS funded placement, even if the person has
friends or family involved.
Support from a self-advocacy organisation (or family advocate where appropriate) or community
advocacy can also help people with understanding processes and their rights, making decisions
and feeling better supported in their lives, and thereby contribute to reducing the risk of
admission.
The C(E)TR panel should make time to explore the person's ongoing access to advocacy, including
independent advocacy, and make necessary recommendations where they feel this could work
better. This should take a holistic, person-centred approach to the person's needs of advocacy for
their C(E)TR as well as their ongoing care, treatment and any concerns about how services are
listening and responding to the person's needs. The panel should try and establish who in the
person's circle of support at home as well as in hospital is further advocating for that person's
needs.
Ideally before the 'final' pre-discharge C(E)TR and certainly at that one, consideration should be
given to the person's advocacy needs when they leave hospital and what statutory entitlement
exists for this. The panel may also wish to consider whether other forms of advocacy could
support the person when they leave hospital, eg a self-advocacy organisation may help people
build friendships, networks and access to things that will help the person achieve their hopes and
ambitions. Post-discharge advocacy is likely to work best when it is arranged before discharge,
giving the person an opportunity to get to know or even choose their future advocate(s).
Advocacy recommendations or actions
If advocacy is not provided where it would have been as appropriate to do so, the C(E)TR should
flag this as a concern, with a specific recommendation for the person's commissioner, the
advocacy provider and commissioning local authority to ensure this is resolved as a matter of
urgency.
Health and social care agencies must work closely (with the advocacy provider as involved) to
ensure people receive advocacy that is appropriate to their needs.
Summary of statutory entitlements
A person's statutory right to advocacy can take many forms; these should be reasonably adjusted
to meet the specific needs of people with a learning disability and autistic people.
Publicly-funded providers must comply with the public sector equality duty (Equality Act 2010) by
paying due regard when carrying out their functions to eliminating discrimination and advancing
equality of opportunity. For example, self-advocacy organisations led by autistic people and/
or people with a learning disability offer mutual and/or peer support and friendship, which can
complement the support a statutory advocate provides. Statutory advocates specialise in providing
advocacy in specific situations.
85
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Local authorities are responsible for ensuring the provision of a range of independent advocacy
for people of all ages. They are required to commission:
advocacy under the Children Act 1989
advocacy under the Care Act 2014
independent mental health advocates (IMHAs)
independent mental capacity advocates (IMCAs)
independent Care Act advocates (ICAAs)
paid relevant person's representatives (paid RPRs)
NHS complaints advocacy.
Section 26A of the Children Act 1989 and associated regulations and guidance also impose on
local authorities the duty to make arrangements for the provision of advocacy services for care
leavers making or intending to make representations under section 24D of the Children Act 1989
and for children making or intending to make representations under section 26A of the Children
Act 1989.
Local authorities have a duty to provide information about advocacy services and offer help in
obtaining an advocate in certain situations.
Local authorities must provide advocacy services for a looked after child, a child in need or a care
leaver directly making or intending to make a complaint on their own behalf. Children and young
people should be able to secure the support of an advocate when making or intending to make
representations for a change to the service they receive or the establishment they live in, without
this having to be framed first as a specific complaint. Rights to advocacy do not extend to a parent
or another person making a complaint on behalf of a child.
Independent mental health advocates
People of all ages are eligible for support from an IMHA if they are:
detained under certain sections of the Mental Health Act 1983 (MHA)
liable to be detained under the MHA, even if not actually detained, including those currently on
leave of absence or for whom an application or court order for admission has been completed
a conditionally discharged restricted patient, eg under section 117 of the MHA
subject to guardianship
subject to a community treatment order.
People can have an IMHA regardless of whether friends and family are supporting them as well.
The Care Act 2014 places a duty on local authorities to provide access to independent advocacy
for adults over the age of 16 who have no appropriate individual(s) - carer, family or friend - to
support their involvement and where they would otherwise struggle to be involved in care and
support 'processes'.
People aged 16 or over who lack capacity to make particular decisions and who have no
appropriate friends or family to represent them may be entitled to an IMCA.
86
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
If through care and support assessment or planning it is likely that the person will be admitted
to an NHS-funded hospital (including assessment and treatment units) for 28 days or more or a
care home for eight weeks or more, the local authority must provide independent advocacy (even
for those who have an 'appropriate individual' to support them) if it is satisfied that advocacy
would be in the best interests of the individual. ICAAs are often involved when someone is being
discharged from hospital.
Some advocates can be the person's IMHA, IMCA and ICAA at different points in their life; the
benefit of an advocate changing role is that the person will not need to get to know someone
new.
Where someone is eligible, IMCAs provide support in relation to decisions about where someone
is going to live, about serious medical treatment and if a liberty protection safeguard (LPS) is being
sought. They might also provide support in safeguarding situations, although Care Act advocacy is
most likely to be provided in safeguarding situations.
Relevant person's representatives (RPRs), who may be paid, provide support and representations
to people under an LPS authorisation (formerly a standard authorisation) in all matters relating to
their deprivation of liberty (DoL). The RPR can support the person to challenge the LPS.
Where a person lacks capacity to consent to those restrictions, an IMCA can be instructed to
work with them alongside their RPR or as their RPR. The standard authorisation system applies to
patients in hospitals and people in care homes; the LPS (when enacted) will apply to a wider range
of living situations.
Note: There is the potential for some people to have an array of advocates. If the person and their
family (where involved) feel this is not working as well as it could, the C(E)TR panel may want to
discuss this and propose an arrangement that better meets the person's needs, for the placing
commissioner and local authority to progress.
87
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Appendix 6: Safeguarding responsibilities
within C(E)TRs
All professionals who work with vulnerable children and adults have a responsibility to act
appropriately if they have reason to believe that the individual has suffered or is likely to suffer
significant harm.
The Care Act 2014 section 42 defines a vulnerable or at-risk adult as anyone over the age of 18
who:
a) has needs for care and support
b) is experiencing, or is at risk of, abuse or neglect, and
c) as a result of those needs is unable to protect themself against the abuse or neglect or the risk
of it.
It also requires the local authority to make (or cause to be made) whatever enquiries it thinks
necessary to decide whether any action should be taken in the adult's case and, if so, what and by
whom.
For those being cared for in hospital, it is likely that they have suffered traumatic and possibly
abusive experiences within their life, and throughout their journey in the education and care
system. The use of restrictive practices is likely to have an adverse impact on their human rights,
wellbeing and for many adds additional trauma to their experience.
There are clear processes in place for commissioners, providers, professionals and families to raise
safeguarding concerns if they have any in relation to the person they are caring for or their family
member.
If C(E)TR panels have concerns about the safety and wellbeing of a person, the chair - along
with the other panel members - should consider these issues seriously to determine what
additional actions may be necessary. The chair should always ensure that there is a collaborative
discussion with the other panel members to help determine consensus about an appropriate way
forward, while remaining clear that each panel member also has an individual and professional
responsibility to raise safeguarding concerns if they believe they are present.
If the chair (and/or panel) believe there are safeguarding issues relating to the care provided to the
person, they will take responsibility for alerting the provider, commissioner and where appropriate
the individual and family, and make the referral. They are also responsible for ensuring there is
immediate feedback regarding the issues to the commissioner (if they have delegated authority)
and the provider so appropriate internal escalation processes can also be triggered.
Different levels of seriousness of safeguarding issues may require a different level of response.
While every circumstance needs to be considered individually, below are some suggested levels of
response for issues.
88
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Situation
Suggested response
Responsible individual
There are serious concerns
C(E)TR should be halted. Immediate
Chair (alongside
about the safety and
escalation to regional director of nursing,
responsible commissioner
wellbeing of the person.
commissioner and provider.
if authority has been
delegated)
Chair/panel considers it
Urgent referral made to the local authority
is unsafe for the person
on the day of the review.
to remain in their current
situation.
The panel are required to remain until a
response mitigates the risk and ensures the
individual is appropriately safeguarded.
Ensure CQC is appropriately notified.
There are serious concerns
Issues to be immediately identified with
Chair (alongside
about the safety and
relevant individual/providers.
responsible commissioner
wellbeing of the patient
if authority has been
that need urgent attention.
Referral made to the local authority on the
delegated)
day of the review.
Chair/panel does not think
the concerns pose such
Review concludes and its clear
imminent and urgent risk
recommendations and actions include the
to the person that they are
safeguarding concerns and actions.
likely to require a move that
day.
Chair and panel are assured that some
immediate steps are being taken to
safeguard the individual.
Ensure CQC is appropriately notified.
At the conclusion of
Review concludes and clear
Chair (alongside
the review, the chair/
recommendations are made.
responsible commissioner
panel believes there are
if authority has been
safeguarding concerns
Issues to be identified with relevant
delegated)
about the individual that
individuals/provider immediately and before
require a response but they
the chair/panel leaves the review.
are not at risk of immediate
significant harm.
Referral made to the local authority the
following day.
In the days following
Chair communicates this to the provider/
Chair (alongside
the C(E)TR and after
commissioner/relevant individuals.
responsible commissioner
consideration, the chair/
if authority has been
panel feels there are
Chair makes the safeguarding referral.
delegated)
safeguarding issues that
need further scrutiny/
redress.
89
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Appendix 7: 12-point discharge plan (part of Assuring
Transformation dataset reporting requirements)
The NHS Long Term Plan confirms that every area will "implement and be monitored against a
12-point discharge plan to ensure discharges are timely and effective." NHS Long Term Plan 3.36
The 12-point discharge plan is a tool that should be used to support commissioners, partners, the
individual and their families to ensure appropriate steps are in place to support a timely discharge.
Some individuals may not need every element of the plan utilised to support their discharge,
but it is a helpful prompt to ensure that steps are being appropriately considered at the earliest
possible stage so there are no delays to discharge due to last minute considerations of planning,
commissioning or managing legal processes.
Progress of individuals against the discharge plan is monitored via the Assuring Transformation
dataset.
90
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
1.
Person in active treatment - start discharge planning.
2.
Person identified as ready for discharge - person centred service specification
outline to be commenced.
3.
Capacity assessment to be completed (community accommodation and support).
4.
Risk assessment - community based risk assessment to be completed.
5.
Service specification complete - ready to be advertised/tendered.
6.
Procurement process to be undertaken (where required).
7.
Accommodation search to be identified and secured and adaptions completed.
8.
8.1 Funding (for discharge support) to be agreed and in place.
8.2 Additional funding (other relevant funding agreed and in place - where required).
9.
9.1 Workforce provision - ensure provider staff are recruited.
9.2 Workforce provision - community multidisciplinary team personnel identified.
10.
10.1 Legal framework - Mental Health Tribunal (if appropriate).
10.2 Legal framework - Court of Protection (if required).
10.3 Legal framework - Parole Board application (if required).
10.4 Legal framework - Ministry of Justice application (if required).
11.
11.1 Community move/discharge - communicate and commence transition plan.
11.2 Community move/discharge - s17 leave underway as part of transition to
community placement.
12.
Discharge.
91
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Appendix 8: Local area emergency protocol
In circumstances where an admission is unplanned, urgent or someone is in 'crisis' it is recognised
that a C(E)TR may be, on a practical level, very difficult to set up due to short time scales, level of
risk and the need for urgent action.
The aim of the local area emergency protocol (LAEP) is to provide the commissioner with a set of
prompts and questions both to prevent people with a learning disability or autistic people from
being admitted unnecessarily to a mental health hospital; and where there is a clearly supported
clinical indication for admission to ensure that the intended outcomes and timescales are clear.
It is also intended to help identify barriers to supporting a person to remain in the community and
to make clear and constructive recommendations as to how these barriers could be overcome by
working together and using resources creatively.
It is important to note that the LAEP does not replace the community C(E)TR and should
only be used by exception. Where a community C(E)TR has not taken place, the pathway
for a post-admission C(E)TR must be followed.
This protocol describes when this response is needed and suggests who should attend and
what should be discussed. Organisations need to agree to using this protocol locally to support
prioritisation of their time and resource to respond both flexibly and at short notice to a request
for a meeting.
For NHS England specialist commissioned services, a referral for an access assessment may happen
alongside this protocol if it is felt that the individual may need to be admitted to a secure service
or children and young people's mental health service (CYPMHS).
The protocol
Anyone involved in the care of a person with a learning disability, autism or both, and who is at
risk of being admitted to hospital unnecessarily, can raise concerns about them. This ordinarily
should lead to a community C(E)TR being arranged. This protocol is to be used where there is no
prior knowledge of the escalating risk of admission or the time to set up or hold a C(E)TR.
The lead commissioner will be responsible for ensuring that a LAEP meeting is organised and
chaired.
Every effort must be made to involve the individual and/or their representative/advocate and
family to gain their views on options for treatment and support and what could help avoid
admission to hospital. The format of the LAEP is therefore most likely to be a virtual meeting to
allow people to participate at short notice, but it can be a face-to-face meeting.
It is important for all involved to agree to a 'no blame' principle, to give individuals or services the
confidence to speak up should they face difficulties fulfilling their contracted role(s).
92
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Role
Involvement
Person being considered
To give a first-hand account of issues and what would help. Listening to the
for admission
person is essential and should be prioritised and facilitated.
Family member(s)
To give additional information. Listening to the family's views, ideas and
wishes should be prioritised and facilitated.
Psychiatrist
To provide feedback on assessed clinical needs and risks. Role in MHA
processes.
Community learning
Co-ordination role; provider of clinical information.
disability nurse
Children's social worker, care manager; involvement in assessment and care
planning.
Social worker
As appropriate - to advocate for the individual.
IMHA/IMCA/independent
advocate
Commissioner
To provide funding for alternatives to institutional care.
GP
To ensure effective support around health needs as required.
School/education provider/
To ensure education considerations are fully understood.
commissioner
Protocol steps
1.
The chair is made known to people and the current situation is shared.
2.
Understanding the person.
The needs and wishes of the person are identified, including hearing from the person
and if appropriate, their family, relevant carers and clinicians.
3.
The current risks are identified.
4.
Care, education and treatment needs.
Options considered (see preference list on page 95).
5.
Current resources and potential resources are identified.
6.
Decision made and support plan agreed. Responsible people are identified to
follow up.
93
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Questions that help focus discussions
1
Gather a pen picture. 'Understanding me?'
2
What are my and my family's/carers' views of the current situation?
3
What are my symptoms?
How is my physical health?
Does any of this mean I need to be in hospital?
Have I had an annual health check and do I have a health action plan?
4
What are the current issues and risks and how can I stay safe and keep others around me safe?
5
What's working well/what doesn't work? (Everyone's views, including about what has helped
me before.)
6
What support has been/can be put in place so I can stay in the community?
7
What treatment am I currently receiving, including medication, therapy, diet and care?
Does this need reviewing?
Is it helping?
8
Can the care, education and treatment I need be given in a community setting?
9
What additional support is needed to keep me/others safe in the community?
10
What resources are available/can be created or used in a different way to support me?
11
What additional support does my family/carers need?
Has there been a carers assessment?
12
Do I have advocacy to support me to understand my care and treatment?
13
What is the reason for considering inpatient admission?
14
What would the outcomes of an admission be for me?
15
What would the impact of admission be on me and others around me? (For example, moving
away from home and the people I know to a new environment.)
The outcomes of this meeting should be recorded as per local policy and lead to an updated care
plan and risk assessment (or education, health and care plan (ECHP) for a child or young person).
94
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Preference list
No placement should take place 'out of area' without the commissioner's agreement.
The preference order for support arrangements is:
Preference 1 Support the person at home (with the relevant help given there). Additional
support packages will be considered favourably by commissioners.
Preference 2 Support the person in a local non-inpatient unit, using residential nursing or via a
short break service.
Preference 3 Admit the person to an inpatient service in their local ICS area. Note that mental
health needs should be met in acute mental health services and underlying
physical health needs in acute hospitals.
Out-of-area placements should be avoided if at all possible. The commissioner needs to approve
out-of-area placements in line with the contracting process. These will only be considered when
the move is justified by clinical need and/or risk management, and all other avenues have been
exhausted. Any such agreed placement should be time limited.
Any gaps in local delivery that mean needs cannot be met locally should be reported to the
relevant commissioner.
Follow-up
If an individual is at risk of admission and does not have a care pathway, they should be allocated
a lead professional or keyworker to follow-up the agreed care plan. For an individual under 25,
this may trigger a review of their ECHP.
The revised care plan will require regular review by the keyworker to ascertain its effectiveness and
quality. The individual will now be placed on the local DSR that identifies people who are at risk of
admission, if they consent and are not already on it.
Should an individual be admitted following a LAEP meeting, a full C(E)TR will need to take place
within 10 working days for children and young people and within 20 working days for adults.
95
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Appendix 9: Data to monitor C(E)TR pathway
implementation and outcomes
The effectiveness of C(E)TRs will be measured using local, regional and national anonymised
datasets, alongside tools such as feedback questionnaires and local audit.
Most of the required data can be accessed via existing routes, including the Assuring
Transformation dataset.
Regional learning disability and autism teams will require access to anonymised C(E)TR
information to quality assure the C(E)TR process. Using the information gathered they will
seek to determine:
if each area has a DSR and a way to monitor its effectiveness in ensuring provision of
additional support and/or predicting admissions
whether the C(E)TR policy is being adhered to
whether the C(E)TR standards are being met
whether or not people are admitted following a community C(E)TR and, for those admitted,
whether length of stay following C(E)TRs are falling
rates of admission among people whose admission was previously avoided through the
provision of additional support, and of re-admission following discharge from an inpatient
setting
whether C(E)TRs are a positive experience for people and their families
whether people and families have an improved experience of care and support following a
C(E)TR
whether C(E)TR intelligence is being collated and acted on in response to concerns raised
about the quality of care, both at individual and collective levels (eg regarding specific
providers).
96
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Appendix 10: CTR policy — restricted patients
This appendix concerns patients subject to Ministry of Justice restrictions. Please refer to
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/mentally-disordered-offenders-the-restricted-
patient-system in conjunction with the flow chart below for guidance.
CTR flowchart for restricted patients
Ready for discharge (or care and treatment can be provided in a less restrictive
environment).
As part of the recommendations, RC to contact MoJ within one week, specifying
outcome of CTR.
CTR outcome
Contact with MoJ should be made via MHCSmailbox@justice.gov.uk with 'outcome
of CTR' in the subject heading.
RC to feedback to lead commissioner on outcome of contact with MoJ.
Lead commissioner to record information in monitoring template (see below).
97
Monitoring template for patients subject to MoJ restrictions
The responsible commissioner should use this template to track outcomes and follow-up for restricted patients.
Reference
C(E)TR
C(E)TR
Provider
Responsible
Responsible
Type of referral
Date of
Narrative
Any
number
date
outcome
name
clinician
commissioner
(request
response
reopens
escalation
name
referral date
for leave,
from MoJ
to MoJ
discharge)
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
98
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Appendix 11: Support for C(E)TR panel
members and their requirements
Recruitment
ICSs and provider collaboratives should ensure that panel members are recruited through a
robust process that includes shortlisting and interviewing against a set of core competencies.
Clinical experts should be able to provide evidence of qualification and a current registration with
their relevant professional body.
Individuals should be subject to usual pre-employment checks as per the local HR policy for any
roles that include working with vulnerable adults and/or children and young people.
Induction
Panel members will be required to undertake mandatory training prior to commencing their role
and should be offered additional skills training modules as identified as part of their induction
process. Shadowing an experienced C(E)TR panel (subject to consent of the person and their
family) should also be considered as part of the induction to ensure a greater understanding of
the expectations of the role.
Training requirements
Health Education England is working with partner agencies to develop a suite of C(E)TR training
modules. These will include core, mandatory and skills modules that will be available to all
panel members at no cost to local systems. For existing panel members, they will be expected
to undertake the mandatory modules within six months of the release date of the training. New
panel members will be expected to undertake the mandatory training prior to commencing their
role.
Conflicts of interest
Due to the independent nature of the expert by experience and the clinical expert, conflicts of
interest are an important consideration in the C(E)TR process. Panel members are responsible
for declaring any potential conflicts of interest as soon as they become aware of them. They
should do so by raising any potential conflict with the commissioner immediately so that it can be
discussed and, where required, an alternative panel member sought as soon as possible.
Examples of conflicts are:
previously having worked with the person in a clinical capacity
previously having worked for the provider
having been an inpatient at the hospital
having a family member who has been or is an inpatient at the hospital
having a family member who has been or is under the clinical care of a member of the MDT.
Ongoing support and supervision
Local areas should ensure that panel members are offered regular supervision and support, in
addition to the debrief process. This could be in the form of a monthly peer support group or on
a one-to-one basis. For subcontracting arrangements, this can be undertaken by the employing
organisation.
99
Dynamic support register and Care (Education) and Treatment Review
Reasonable adjustments
It is essential that panel members are asked about any reasonable adjustments they require prior
to undertaking the review. This is particularly important for the expert by experience role where
panel members may be autistic or have a learning disability. Their sensory and communication
needs will be an important consideration when undertaking the review and they (or their
supporter) should be given the opportunity to share this information in advance. Adjustments
may need to be made with the sharing and allowed reading time of any documentation as well
as considering whether some of the review may be better undertaken using a hybrid model (part
face to face and part through online platforms).
Payment
Payment for panel members is made in several different ways:
For reviews commissioned by NHS England or provider collaboratives, experts are required to be
'employed' for tax purposes.
For reviews commissioned by ICSs, experts are required to invoice for payment and are
responsible for their own tax arrangements.
In some areas, third-sector organisations have a 'subcontracting arrangement' for experts by
experience.
The suggested minimum rates of pay have been increased as shown below.
Role
Suggested new minimum rate of pay
Expert by experience
£250 per review (previously £150)
Clinical expert
£350 per review (previously £300)
These rates should not be viewed as a 'day rate'. They are for the whole review, including any
advance reading requirements and panel follow-up actions. For experts by experience they reflect
the NHS England policy for working with patient and public voice partners.
The role of the expert by experience and clinical expert should be equally valued for the different
skills and experience they bring to the panel.
It is recognised that the clinical expert will be professionally accountable for their role within
the C(E)TR in accordance with the requirements of the professional body that they hold active
registration with.
Expenses
Expenses are also claimed in several ways:
Experts who are employed should contact their recruiting manager to clarify the process for
claiming expenses from the employing organisation.
Other panel members who invoice for payments should contact the commissioner to confirm
what they can claim expenses for and the agreed amount (such as for mileage).
100
