Department
for Education
Early years
foundation stage
statutory framework
For group and school-based providers
Setting the standards for learning,
development and care for children from
birth to five
Dated: 14 July 2025
Effective: 01 September 2025
1
Contents
Summary
4
About this statutory framework
4
What legislation is this framework based on?
5
Who is this framework for?
6
Before/after school care and holiday provision
6
Introduction
7
Overarching principles
7
Section 1 - The learning and development requirements
8
The areas of learning and development
8
Educational Programmes
9
Early Learning Goals
11
Learning and Development Considerations
16
Section 2 - Assessment
18
Ongoing assessment
18
Progress check at age two
18
Assessment at the start of the reception year - the Reception Baseline Assessment
(RBA)
19
Assessment at the end of the EYFS - the Early Years Foundation Stage Profile
(EYFSP)
19
Section 3 - The safeguarding and welfare requirements
22
Introduction
22
Safeguarding policies and procedures
22
Whistleblowing
23
Concerns about children's safety and welfare
23
Child absences
24
Suitable people
24
References
26
Disqualification
27
Staff taking medication/other substances
28
Smoking and vaping
28
Qualifications, training, support and skills
28
Safeguarding training
28
2
Training and skills
29
Supervision of staff
29
Paediatric First Aid
29
English language skills
30
Key person
30
Staff: child ratios
30
Before/after school care and holiday provision
35
Health
35
Supporting and understanding children's behaviour
38
Special educational needs
38
Safety and suitability of premises, environment and equipment
38
Information and record keeping
42
Other Legal Duties
45
Annex A: Criteria for effective Paediatric First Aid (PFA) training
46
Annex B: Statutory guidance for the Reception Baseline Assessment
48
Summary
48
Introduction and Purpose
49
Accountability and Progress
49
Assessment Data
49
Assessment administration
49
Inclusion and participation
50
Responsibilities
51
Local authority responsibilities
51
Interaction with other assessments
52
Further information
52
Annex C: Criteria for effective safeguarding training
53
3
Summary
About this statutory framework
This Early Years Foundation Stage (EYFS) framework for group and school-based early
years providers is mandatory¹ for:
All persons registered in England with Ofsted on the early years register, or with an
early years childminder agency (CMA):
to provide early years childcare on domestic premises (CoDP) 2; or
to provide early years childcare on non-domestic premises (CoNDP)³;
(referred to collectively in this EYFS framework as 'group-based early
years providers'); and
All schools and independent educational institutions in England who provide early
years provision in respect of which they are exempt from registration by section
34(2) of the Childcare Act 2006⁴ (referred to in this EYFS framework as 'school-
based early years providers').
This EYFS framework refers to all of the above collectively as 'providers', unless
otherwise stated.
The learning and development requirements are in Section 1, the assessment
requirements are in Section 2, and the safeguarding and welfare requirements are in
Section 3 of this framework. This framework uses the word "must" where the requirement
is mandatory. Where the framework uses the word "should", this means that providers
must take the guidance into account when delivering the requirements and should follow
it, unless there is a good reason not to.
1 Section 40 of the Childcare Act 2006 (the '2006 Act') requires early years providers, including early years
providers of CoDPs and CoNDPs, and school and independent educational institution who are exempt from
registration by section 34(2) of the 2006 Act, to secure that the early years provision meets the learning and
development requirements and complies with welfare requirements set out in the EYFS.
2 "Early years childcare on domestic premises (CoDPs)" means early years provision in respect of which a
person is required to be registered by section 34(1A) of the 2006 Act. This is early years provision, at least
some or all of which is on domestic premises, provided for reward, where at any time the number of persons
providing or assisting with the provision exceeds four) (or exceeds three if a person was registered, or had
applied to be registered, to provide early years CoDPs before 1 November 2024).
3 "Early years childcare on non-domestic premises (CoNDPs)" means early years provision provided solely on
non-domestic premises in respect of which a person is required to be registered by section 34(1)(a) of the
2006 Act (including where the provision is provided by a person who was registered, or who had applied to be
registered, to provide early years CoDPs before 1 November 2024).
4 Section 34(2) of the 2006 Act exempts certain schools and independent educational institutions from the
requirement, in section 34(1) and (1A) of the 2006 Act, to register with Ofsted in the early years register, or with
an early years CMA, where the early years provision is made by the school or institution for children aged 2
and over as part of that school or institution's activities.
4
Ofsted and inspectorates of independent schools carry out inspections of how providers
meet and deliver the EYFS framework. Providers of CoDP may be registered with a CMA.
CMAs carry out quality assurance visits of CMA-registered providers of CoDP. For further
details on CMAs please see: Childminder agencies: a guide - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk)
Ofsted and CMAs assess how providers meet and deliver the EYFS framework and report
on the quality and standards of provision. Ofsted carry out inspections of all providers,
including Ofsted-registered providers of CoDP. Childminder agencies (CMAs) carry out
quality assurance visits of CMA-registered providers of CoDP. They both assess how those
providers meet and deliver the EYFS framework and report on the quality and standards of
their early years provision. Ofsted publishes inspection reports at www.gov.uk/ofsted. CMAs
are required to produce a written report following a quality assurance visit and to make this
available to the provider, who is the subject of the report, and to the parents or carers of any
child receiving registered childcare provision from them. CMAs can also be asked to make it
available to Ofsted upon request for inspection.
Ofsted may issue actions if a provider registered on the Early Years Register fails to meet a
requirement set out in this document, and/or may serve a welfare requirements notice if the
failure relates to a requirement set out in Section 3. It is an offence for a provider, without
reasonable excuse, to fail to comply with a welfare requirements notice⁵. If a provider of
CoDP is registered with a CMA, it is for the CMA to determine the shape and content of their
quality assurance arrangements. They will consider how to support CoDP providers to
comply with requirements set out in this document, and what action to take against CoDP
providers who fail to comply. For further details on CMAs please see: Childminder
agencies: a guide - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk)
This framework remains in force until further notice.
What legislation is this framework based on?
The learning and development requirements and the assessment
arrangements are given legal force by an Order⁶ made under section
39(1)(a) of the Childcare Act 2006.
The safeguarding and welfare requirements are given legal force by
Regulations⁷ made under section 39(1)(b) of the Childcare Act 2006.
Providers can apply for exemptions from the learning and development requirements and
assessment arrangements in certain circumstances, such as where their established
5 Regulation 12 of the Early Years Foundation Stage (Welfare Requirements) Regulations 2012
6 The Early Years Foundation Stage (Learning and Development Requirements) Order 2007
(legislation.gov.uk)
7 The Early Years Foundation Stage (Welfare Requirements) Regulations 2012 (legislation.gov.uk)
5
principles are in conflict with the EYFS requirements⁸. Further information can be found on
GOV.UK.
Who is this framework for?
This framework is for all school-based early years providers in England (including
maintained schools; non-maintained schools; independent schools; free schools;
and academies) and all group-based providers who are registered on the Early Years
Register⁹ or with an early years CMA (for providers of CoDP) and caring for early
years children (aged from 0 until the 31 August after their 5th birthday¹⁰).
This framework "for group and school-based early years providers" only applies to group
and school-based early years providers in England. Persons who are registered in
England as an early years childminder with Ofsted on the early years register, or with an
early years CMA should refer to the statutory framework for childminders.
Before/after school care and holiday provision
Settings that only provide care before and after school, or during the school holidays, for
children who normally attend reception (or older) class during the school day do not need
to meet or be guided by the learning and development and assessment requirements set
out in Sections 1 and 2.
However, settings providing this type of wraparound care for children younger than those in
the reception class age range should continue to be guided by, but do not have to meet, the
learning and development and assessment requirements. All such providers should discuss
with parents and/or carers (and other practitioners/providers as appropriate, including
school staff/teachers) the support they intend to offer.
All settings that provide care for children aged 0-5 must meet safeguarding and welfare
requirements as set out in Section 3.
8 Section 46 of the Childcare Act 2006 allows the Secretary of State to give exemptions from the learning and
development requirements in certain prescribed circumstances.
9 The Childcare (Exemptions from Registration) Order 2008 (S.I.2008/979) specifies the circumstances in which
providers are not required to register.
10 Section 20 Childcare Act 2006 defines "early years provision" as the provision of childcare for a young child.
Section 19 of that Act defines a "young child" as a child from birth until immediately before 1st September after
the child reaches the age of 5.
6
Introduction
1.
All children deserve the care and support they need to have the best start in life.
Children learn and develop at a faster rate from birth to five years old than at any other
time in their lives, so their experiences in early years have a major impact on their
future life chances. A secure, safe, and happy childhood is important in its own right.
Good parenting and high-quality early learning provide the foundation children need to
fulfil their potential.
2.
The EYFS sets the standards that all early years providers must meet to ensure that
children learn and develop well and are kept healthy and safe. It promotes teaching and
learning to ensure children's 'school readiness' and gives children the right foundation
for good future progress through school and life.
3.
The EYFS is about what children learn, as well as how they learn. Effective practice is a
mix of different approaches. Children learn through play, by adults modelling, by
observing each other and through adult-guided learning.
4.
The EYFS seeks to provide:
Quality and consistency in all early years settings, so that every child makes
good progress, and no child gets left behind.
A secure foundation through planning for the learning and development of each
individual child and assessing and reviewing what they have learned regularly.
Partnership working between practitioners and with parents and/or carers.
Equality of opportunity and anti-discriminatory practice, ensuring that every
child is included and supported.
Overarching principles
5.
Four guiding principles should shape practice in early years. These are:
Every child is a unique child, who is constantly learning and can be resilient,
capable, confident, and self-assured.
Children learn to be strong and independent through positive relationships.
Children learn and develop well in enabling environments with teaching and
support from adults, who respond to their individual interests and needs and
help them to build their learning over time. Children benefit from a strong
partnership between practitioners and parents and/or carers.
Importance of learning and development. Children develop and learn at different
rates. (See "the characteristics of effective teaching and learning" at paragraph
1.18). The framework covers the education and care of all children, including
children with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND).
7
Section 1 — The learning and development requirements
1.1 This section sets out what providers must do, working in partnership with parents and/or
carers, to promote the learning and development of all children in their care, and to
ensure their entire early years' experience contributes positively to their brain
development and readiness for Key Stage 1. The learning and development
requirements are informed by the best available evidence on how children learn. They
also reflect the broad range of skills, knowledge, and attitudes children need as
foundations for life now and in the future. Early years providers must guide the
development of children's capabilities to help ensure that children in their care will fully
benefit from future opportunities.
1.2 The EYFS learning and development requirements for group and school-based providers
are made up of the seven areas of learning and development, as set out in the
educational programmes described below.
1.3 In reception year, teachers and practitioners will also utilise the early learning goals
which summarise the knowledge, skills and understanding that all young children should
have gained by the end of the EYFS.
The areas of learning and development
1.4 There are seven areas of learning and development that set out what providers must teach
the children in their settings. All areas of learning and development are important and
inter-connected.
1.5 Three prime areas are particularly important for learning and forming relationships. They
build a foundation for children to thrive and provide the basis for learning in all areas.
These are the prime areas:
Communication and language
Physical development
Personal, social and emotional development
1.6 Providers must also support children in four specific areas, which help strengthen and
develop the three prime areas, and ignite children's curiosity and enthusiasm.
The specific areas are:
Literacy
Mathematics
Understanding the world
Expressive arts and design
8
Educational Programmes
The educational programmes are high level curriculum summaries which set out what
should be taught in settings for each area. They must involve activities and experiences
that enable children to learn and develop, as set out under each of the areas of learning.
Communication and Language
The development of children's spoken language underpins all seven areas of learning and
development. Children's back-and-forth interactions from an early age form the
foundations for language and cognitive development. The number and quality of the
conversations they have with adults and peers throughout the day in a language-rich
environment is crucial. By commenting on what children are interested in or doing, and
echoing back what they say with new vocabulary added, practitioners will build children's
language effectively. Reading frequently to children, and engaging them actively in stories,
non-fiction, rhymes and poems, and then providing them with extensive opportunities to
use and embed new words in a range of contexts, will give children the opportunity to
thrive. Through conversation, storytelling and role play, where children share their ideas
with support and modelling from their teacher, and sensitive questioning that invites them
to elaborate, children become comfortable using a rich range of vocabulary and language
structures.
Personal, Social and Emotional Development
Children's personal, social and emotional development (PSED) is crucial for children to
lead healthy and happy lives and is fundamental to their cognitive development.
Underpinning their personal development are the important attachments that shape their
social world. Strong, warm and supportive relationships with adults enable children to
learn how to understand their own feelings and those of others. Children should be
supported to manage emotions, develop a positive sense of self, set themselves simple
goals, have confidence in their own abilities, to persist and wait for what they want and
direct attention as necessary. Through adult modelling and guidance, they will learn how to
look after their bodies, including healthy eating, and manage personal needs
independently. Through supported interaction with other children, they learn how to make
good friendships, co-operate and resolve conflicts peaceably. These attributes will provide
a secure platform from which children can achieve at school and in later life.
9
Physical Development
Physical activity is vital in children's all-round development, enabling them to pursue happy,
healthy and active lives 11 Gross and fine motor experiences develop incrementally
throughout early childhood, starting with sensory explorations and the development of a
child's strength, co-ordination and positional awareness through tummy time, crawling and
play movement with both objects and adults. By creating games and providing opportunities
for play both indoors and outdoors, adults can support children to develop their core
strength, stability, balance, spatial awareness, co-ordination and agility. Gross motor skills
provide the foundation for developing healthy bodies and social and emotional well-being.
Fine motor control and precision helps with hand-eye co-ordination, which is later linked to
early literacy. Repeated and varied opportunities to explore and play with small world
activities, puzzles, arts and crafts and the practice of using small tools, with feedback and
support from adults, allow children to develop proficiency, control and confidence.
Literacy
It is crucial for children to develop a life-long love of reading. Reading consists of two
dimensions: language comprehension and word reading. Language comprehension
(necessary for both reading and writing) starts from birth. It only develops when adults talk
with children about the world around them and the books (stories and non-fiction) they
read with them, and enjoy rhymes, poems and songs together. Skilled word reading,
taught later, involves both the speedy working out of the pronunciation of unfamiliar printed
words (decoding) and the speedy recognition of familiar printed words. Writing involves
transcription (spelling and handwriting) and composition (articulating ideas and structuring
them in speech, before writing).
Mathematics
Developing a strong grounding in number is essential so that all children develop the
necessary building blocks to excel mathematically. Children should be able to count
confidently, develop a deep understanding of the numbers to 10, the relationships
between them and the patterns within those numbers. By providing frequent and varied
opportunities to build and apply this understanding - such as using manipulatives,
including small pebbles and tens frames for organising counting - children will develop a
secure base of knowledge and vocabulary from which mastery of mathematics is built. In
addition, it is important that the curriculum includes rich opportunities for children to
develop their spatial reasoning skills across all areas of mathematics including shape,
space and measures. It is important that children develop positive attitudes and interests
in mathematics, look for patterns and relationships, spot connections, 'have a go', talk to
adults and peers about what they notice and not be afraid to make mistakes.
11 Guidance on physical activity from the Chief Medical Officer is available at:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/physical-activity-guidelines-uk-chief-medical-officers-report
10
Understanding the World
Understanding the world involves guiding children to make sense of their physical world
and their community. The frequency and range of children's personal experiences
increases their knowledge and sense of the world around them - from visiting parks,
libraries and museums to meeting important members of society such as police officers,
nurses and firefighters. In addition, listening to a broad selection of stories, non-fiction,
rhymes and poems will foster their understanding of our culturally, socially, technologically
and ecologically diverse world. As well as building important knowledge, this extends their
familiarity with words that support understanding across domains.
Enriching and widening children's vocabulary will support later reading comprehension.
Expressive Arts and Design
The development of children's artistic and cultural awareness supports their imagination
and creativity. It is important that children have regular opportunities to engage with the
arts, enabling them to explore and play with a wide range of media and materials. The
quality and variety of what children see, hear and participate in is crucial for developing
their understanding, self-expression, vocabulary and ability to communicate through the
arts. The frequency, repetition and depth of their experiences are fundamental to their
progress in interpreting and appreciating what they hear, respond to and observe.
Early Learning Goals
1.7 The level of development children should be expected to have reached by the end of the
EYFS is defined by the early learning goals (ELGs) as set out below.
1.8 The ELGs should not be used as a curriculum or in any way to limit the wide variety of
rich experiences that are crucial to child development.
1.9 Instead, the ELGs should support practitioners to make a holistic, best-fit judgement
about a child's development at the end of the EYFS, and their readiness for year 1.
1.10 Practitioners working with children below reception age do not need to use the ELGs as,
for the vast majority of children, the EYFS Profile will be carried out by their school
teacher at the end of the reception year. A group-based provider may need to use the
ELGs to complete the EYFS Profile assessment for children aged 4-5 if this is not being
done in reception year at school, however this is very rare (please see paragraph 2.13
below).
1.11 When forming a judgement about whether an individual child is at the expected level of
development, teachers should draw on their knowledge of the child and their own expert
professional judgement. This is enough evidence to assess a child's individual level of
development in relation to each of the ELGs. Recorded, written or photographic evidence
is not required.
11
Communication and Language
ELG: Listening, Attention and Understanding
Children at the expected level of development will:
Listen attentively and respond to what they hear with relevant questions,
comments and actions when being read to and during whole class discussions
and small group interactions.
Make comments about what they have heard and ask questions to clarify their
understanding.
Hold conversation when engaged in back-and-forth exchanges with their
teacher and peers.
ELG: Speaking
Children at the expected level of development will:
Participate in small group, class and one-to-one discussions, offering their own
ideas, using recently introduced vocabulary.
Offer explanations for why things might happen, making use of recently
introduced vocabulary from stories, non-fiction, rhymes and poems when
appropriate.
Express their ideas and feelings about their experiences using full sentences,
including use of past, present and future tenses and making use of
conjunctions, with modelling and support from their teacher.
Personal, Social and Emotional Development
ELG: Self-Regulation
Children at the expected level of development will:
Show an understanding of their own feelings and those of others and begin to
regulate their behaviour accordingly.
Set and work towards simple goals, being able to wait for what they want and
control their immediate impulses when appropriate.
Give focused attention to what the teacher says, responding appropriately even
when engaged in activity, and show an ability to follow instructions involving
several ideas or actions.
ELG: Managing Self
Children at the expected level of development will:
Be confident to try new activities and show independence, resilience and
perseverance in the face of challenge.
12
Explain the reasons for rules, know right from wrong and try to behave
accordingly.
Manage their own basic hygiene and personal needs, including dressing, going
to the toilet and understanding the importance of healthy food choices.
ELG: Building Relationships
Children at the expected level of development will:
Work and play cooperatively and take turns with others.
Form positive attachments to adults and friendships with peers.
Show sensitivity to their own and to others' needs.
Physical Development
ELG: Gross Motor Skills
Children at the expected level of development will:
Negotiate space and obstacles safely, with consideration for themselves and
others.
Demonstrate strength, balance and coordination when playing.
Move energetically, such as running, jumping, dancing, hopping, skipping and
climbing.
ELG: Fine Motor Skills
Children at the expected level of development will:
Hold a pencil effectively in preparation for fluent writing - using the tripod grip in
almost all cases.
Use a range of small tools, including scissors, paint brushes and cutlery.
Begin to show accuracy and care when drawing.
Literacy
ELG: Comprehension
Children at the expected level of development will:
Demonstrate understanding of what has been read to them by retelling stories
and narratives using their own words and recently introduced vocabulary.
Anticipate - where appropriate - key events in stories.
Use and understand recently introduced vocabulary during discussions about
stories, non-fiction, rhymes and poems and during role-play.
13
ELG: Word Reading
Children at the expected level of development will:
Say a sound for each letter in the alphabet and at least 10 digraphs.
Read words consistent with their phonic knowledge by sound-blending.
Read aloud simple sentences and books that are consistent with their phonic
knowledge, including some common exception words.
ELG: Writing
Children at the expected level of development will:
Write recognisable letters, most of which are correctly formed.
Spell words by identifying sounds in them and representing the sounds with a
letter or letters.
Write simple phrases and sentences that can be read by others.
Mathematics
ELG: Number
Children at the expected level of development will:
Have a deep understanding of numbers to 10, including the composition of each
number.
Subitise (recognise quantities without counting) up to 5.
Automatically recall (without reference to rhymes, counting or other aids)
number bonds up to 5 (including subtraction facts) and some number bonds to
10, including double facts.
ELG: Numerical Patterns
Children at the expected level of development will:
Verbally count beyond 20, recognising the pattern of the counting system.
Compare quantities up to 10 in different contexts, recognising when one quantity
is greater than, less than or the same as the other quantity.
Explore and represent patterns within numbers up to 10, including evens and
odds, double facts and how quantities can be distributed equally.
Understanding the World
ELG: Past and Present
Children at the expected level of development will:
Talk about the lives of the people around them and their roles in society.
14
Know some similarities and differences between things in the past and now,
drawing on their experiences and what has been read in class.
Understand the past through settings, characters and events encountered in books
read in class and storytelling.
ELG: People, Culture and Communities
Children at the expected level of development will:
Describe their immediate environment using knowledge from observation,
discussion, stories, non-fiction texts and maps.
Know some similarities and differences between different religious and cultural
communities in this country, drawing on their experiences and what has been read
in class.
Explain some similarities and differences between life in this country and life in
other countries, drawing on knowledge from stories, non-fiction texts and - when
appropriate - maps.
ELG: The Natural World
Children at the expected level of development will:
Explore the natural world around them, making observations and drawing pictures
of animals and plants.
Know some similarities and differences between the natural world around them and
contrasting environments, drawing on their experiences and what has been read in
class.
Understand some important processes and changes in the natural world around
them, including the seasons and changing states of matter.
Expressive Arts and Design
ELG: Creating with Materials
Children at the expected level of development will:
Safely use and explore a variety of materials, tools and techniques, experimenting
with colour, design, texture, form and function.
Share their creations, explaining the process they have used.
Make use of props and materials when role playing characters in narratives and
stories.
ELG: Being Imaginative and Expressive
Children at the expected level of development will:
15
Invent, adapt and recount narratives and stories with peers and their teacher.
Sing a range of well-known nursery rhymes and songs.
Perform songs, rhymes, poems and stories with others, and - when appropriate -
try to move in time with music.
Learning and Development Considerations
1.12 Practitioners should be ambitious for all children. To do this they must consider the
individual needs, interests, and development of each child in their care. They must use
this information to plan a challenging and enjoyable experience for each child in all areas
of learning and development. Practitioners working with the youngest children are
expected to ensure a strong foundation for children's development in the three prime
areas. The specific areas of learning provide children with a broad curriculum and with
opportunities to strengthen and apply the prime areas of learning. This is particularly
important in developing language and extending vocabulary.
Acting on concerns
1.13 Throughout the early years, if a provider is worried about a child's progress in any prime
area, practitioners must discuss this with the child's parents and/or carers and agree how
to support the child. Practitioners must consider whether a child needs any additional
support, including whether they may have a special educational need or disability which
requires specialist support.
English as an Additional Language
1.14 For children whose home language is not English, providers may take reasonable steps
to provide opportunities for children to develop and use their home language in play and
learning, supporting their language development at home.
1.15 Providers must ensure that children have sufficient opportunities to learn and reach a
good standard in English language during the EYFS, ensuring children are ready to benefit
from the opportunities available to them when they begin Key Stage 1. When assessing
communication, language, and literacy skills, practitioners must assess children's skills in
English. If a child does not have a strong grasp of English language, practitioners must
explore the child's skills in the home language with parents and/or carers, to establish
whether there is cause for concern about language delay.
Approaches to teaching and learning
1.16 This framework does not prescribe a particular teaching approach. Play is essential for
children's development, building their confidence as they learn to explore, relate to
others, set their own goals, and solve problems. Children learn by leading their own play,
and by taking part in play and learning that is guided by adults. Practitioners need to
decide what they want children in their setting to learn, and the most effective ways to
16
teach it. Practitioners must stimulate children's interests, responding to each child's
emerging needs and guiding their development through warm, positive interactions
coupled with secure routines for play and learning.
1.17 As children grow older and move into the reception year, there should be a greater
focus on teaching the essential skills and knowledge in the specific areas of learning.
This will help children to prepare for Key Stage 1.
1.18 In planning and guiding what children learn, practitioners must reflect on the different
rates at which children are developing and adjust their practice appropriately. Three
characteristics of effective teaching and learning are:
Playing and exploring - children investigate and experience things, and 'have
a go'.
Active learning - children concentrate and keep on trying if they encounter
difficulties and enjoy achievements.
Creating and thinking critically - children have and develop their own ideas,
make links between ideas, and develop strategies for doing things.
A quality workforce focused on learning and development and
health and safety
1.19 All children deserve high quality early education and care. This requires a quality
workforce. A well-trained, skilled team of practitioners can help every child achieve the
best possible educational outcomes. Children need to build an attachment with their key
person for their confidence and well-being. The key person also promotes children's
learning by developing a deep understanding of their individual needs and children can
particularly benefit from their modelling and support. The requirements in relation to
workforce training and responsibilities, including that of the key person, are outlined in
Section 3 but they are equally important for children's learning and development as they
are for their safety and welfare.
Curriculum Guidance
1.20 Development Matters, government curriculum guidance for the EYFS, can support
providers to deliver the EYFS learning and development requirements. It can be used to
design an effective early years curriculum. This guidance is non-statutory, so Ofsted,
CMAs, and inspectorates of independent schools will not take this into account when
carrying out inspections or quality assurance visits. It is up to providers to decide how
they deliver the learning and development requirements.
17
Section 2 - Assessment
2.1 Assessment plays an important part in helping parents, carers, and practitioners to
recognise children's progress, understand their needs, and to plan activities and support.
This section sets out the assessment requirements group and school-based providers
must meet, as well as guidance on assessment.
2.2 Assessment should not involve long breaks from interaction with children or require
excessive paperwork. When assessing whether an individual child is at the expected level
of development, practitioners should draw on their knowledge of the child and their own
expert professional judgement. Practitioners are not required to prove this through
collection of any physical evidence.
2.3 Practitioners should keep parents and/or carers up to date with their child's progress and
development. Practitioners should address any learning and development needs in
partnership with parents and/or carers, and any relevant professionals.
2.4 Assessment should inform an ongoing dialogue between practitioners and year 1
teachers about each child's learning and development, to support a successful transition
to Key Stage 1.
Ongoing assessment
2.5 Ongoing assessment (also known as formative assessment) is an integral part of the
learning and development process. It involves practitioners understanding children's
interests and what they know and can do, and then shaping teaching and learning
experiences for each child reflecting that knowledge. In their interactions with children,
practitioners should make and act on their own day-to-day observations about children's
progress and observations that parents and carers share. However, there is no
requirement to keep written records in relation to this.
Progress check at age two
2.6 When a child is aged between two and three, practitioners must review their progress
and provide parents and/or carers with a short written summary of their child's
development in the prime areas.
2.7 Beyond the prime areas, it is for practitioners to decide what the written summary should
include, reflecting the development level and needs of the individual child.
2.8 The summary must:
Highlight areas in which a child is progressing well.
Highlight areas in which some additional support might be needed.
Focus particularly on any areas where there is a concern that a child may have
a developmental delay, which may indicate a special educational need or
disability.
18
Describe the activities and strategies the provider intends to adopt to address
any issues or concerns. This plan should involve parents and carers and other
professionals (for example, the provider's Special Educational Needs Co-
ordinator (SENCO) or health professionals) as appropriate.
2.9 If a child moves settings between the ages of two and three, it is expected that the
progress check would usually be undertaken by the setting where the child has spent
most time. Practitioners must discuss with parents and/or carers how the summary of
development can be used to support learning at home. Non-statutory guidance,
Progress check at age 2, is available to support practitioners in completing the progress
check.
2.10 Practitioners should encourage parents and/or carers to share information from the
progress check with other relevant professionals, including their health visitor and the
staff of any new provision the child may move to. Practitioners must agree with parents
and/or carers when will be the most useful point to provide a summary. Where possible,
the progress check and the Healthy Child Programme health and development review
at age two (when health visitors gather information on a child's health and development)
should inform each other and support integrated working. This will allow health and
education professionals to identify strengths as well as any developmental delay and
any particular support from which they think the child/family might benefit. Providers
must have the consent of parents and/or carers to share information directly with other
relevant professionals.
Assessment at the start of the reception year — the Reception
Baseline Assessment (RBA)
2.11 The Reception Baseline Assessment (RBA) is a short assessment, taken in the first six
weeks in which a child starts reception. This information is therefore only relevant to
reception teachers in school-based provision.
2.12 Requirements for the administration of the RBA are set out in Annex B. That Annex covers
all intakes in reception within an academic year including during autumn, spring and
summer terms.
Assessment at the end of the EYFS - the Early Years
Foundation Stage Profile (EYFSP)
2.13 In the final term of the academic year in which the child reaches age five, and no later
than 30 June in that term, the EYFS Profile must be completed for each child (except
where paragraph 2.18 applies). This is therefore usually undertaken by reception
teachers, but on rare occasions it could be undertaken in other settings too. A provider
other than a reception teacher must complete the EYFS Profile only where a child they
are caring for has not started school by the final term of the year in which the child
reaches age 5 and will complete the EYFS in their setting.
19
2.14 The Profile provides parents and carers, practitioners and teachers with a well- rounded
picture of a child's knowledge, understanding and abilities, their attainment against
expected levels, and their readiness for year 1. The Profile must reflect practitioners'
own knowledge and professional judgement of a child to inform discussions with
parents and carers, and any other person whom the teacher, parent or carer judges can
offer a useful contribution.
2.15 Each child's level of development must be assessed against the early learning goals.
Practitioners must note whether children are meeting expected levels of development,
or if they are not yet reaching expected levels ("emerging").
2.16 Year 1 teachers must be given a copy of the Profile report. Reception teachers, or early
years practitioners where the Profile has been completed for a child who has remained
in registered early years provision, may choose to provide a short commentary on each
child's skills and abilities in relation to the three key characteristics of effective teaching
and learning (see paragraph 1.18). These should help inform a discussion between
reception and year 1 teachers about each child's stage of development and learning
needs and assist with the planning of activities in year 1.
2.17 Relevant providers must share the results of the Profile with parents and/or carers, and
explain to them when and how they can discuss the Profile with the practitioner who
completed it. For children attending more than one setting, the Profile must be
completed by the setting where the child spends most time. If a child moves to a new
setting during the academic year, the original setting must send their assessment of the
child's level of development against the early learning goals to the relevant school
within 15 days of receiving a request. If a child moves during the summer term, relevant
providers must agree which of them will complete the Profile.
2.18 In exceptional circumstances, after discussion and only in agreement with parents
and/or carers, a child might remain in EYFS provision beyond the end of the academic
year in which they reach age 5¹². In these exceptional cases, assessment should
continue throughout the child's time within EYFS provision and the Profile should be
completed once only, at the end of the year before the child moves into year 1. If the
child is only continuing in EYFS provision for part of the following year, the Profile
should be completed at the end of the child's time in the EYFS before they move into
year 1. The data should then be submitted at the end of that academic year with the
rest of the cohort. We recommend the decision for the child to remain in the EYFS is
made before starting the Profile for the cohort. However, if the decision is made after
the Profile has already been completed, then a new assessment will need to be made
and submitted the following year with the new cohort.
12 This does not alter compulsory school age, which remains whichever of 31 December, 31 March or 31
August comes first after the child's 5th birthday: School admissions: School starting age - GOV.UK
20
2.19 The school should discuss their intention to defer the child's statutory assessment with
their local authority. This will ensure the child's data is not considered missing when the
school submits Profile outcomes for the current cohort.
2.20 The Profile must be completed for all children, including those with special educational
needs or disabilities (SEND). Reasonable adjustments to the assessment process for
children with SEND must be made as appropriate. Providers should consider whether
they may need to seek specialist assistance to help with this. Children will have differing
levels of knowledge, skills and abilities across the Profile, and it is important that there
is a full assessment of all areas of their development, to inform plans for future activities
and to identify any additional support needs.
Information to be provided to the local authority
2.21 Early years providers must report EYFS Profile results to local authorities, upon
request¹³. Local authorities are under a duty to return this data to the relevant
government department.
13 The Childcare (Provision of Information About Young Children) (England) Regulations 2009
21
Section 3 - The safeguarding and welfare requirements
Introduction
3.1 Children learn best when they are healthy, safe, secure, when their individual needs are
met, and when they have positive relationships with the people caring for them.
3.2 This section of the framework sets out the safeguarding and welfare requirements
providers must meet. They are designed to help providers create a high-quality,
welcoming, and safe setting where children can enjoy learning and grow in confidence.
3.3 Providers must take all necessary steps to keep children safe and well. The requirements
in this section explain what early years providers must do to:
Safeguard children.
Ensure the people who have contact with children are suitable.
Promote good health.
Support and understand behaviour.
Maintain records, policies, and procedures.
Safeguarding policies and procedures
3.4 In every setting, a practitioner must be designated to take lead responsibility for
safeguarding children. The designated safeguarding lead (DSL) is responsible for liaison
with local statutory children's services agencies, and with the Local Safeguarding
Partners (LSPs). All practitioners must be alert to any issues of concern in the child's life
at home or elsewhere.
3.5 Providers must have and implement policies and procedures to keep children safe and
meet EYFS requirements. Schools are not required to have separate policies to cover
EYFS requirements provided the requirements are already met through an existing
policy. Where providers are required to have policies and procedures as specified
below, these policies and procedures should be recorded in writing. Policies and
procedures should be in line with the guidance and procedures of the relevant LSP.
3.6 Safeguarding policies must include:
The action to be taken when there are safeguarding concerns about a child.
The action to be taken in the event of an allegation being made against a member
of staff.
How mobile phones, cameras and other electronic devices with imaging and
sharing capabilities are used in the setting.
Procedures to follow to check the suitability of new recruits.
22
Detail of how safeguarding training is delivered and how practitioners are
supported to put this into practice.
Providers may find it helpful to read Safeguarding children and protecting professionals in
early years settings: online safety considerations'.
Whistleblowing
3.7 Providers must put appropriate whistleblowing procedures in place for all staff (including
students and volunteers) to raise concerns about poor or unsafe practice in the setting's
safeguarding provision. This must include when and how to report concerns and the
process that will be followed after staff report concerns. Providers must ensure staff are
aware of the setting's whistleblowing procedures and must ensure all staff feel able to
raise concerns about poor or unsafe practice and know that such concerns will be taken
seriously by the senior leadership team.
3.8 Where a staff member feels unable to raise an issue with their employer, or feels that their
genuine concerns are not being addressed, they should use the other channels open to
them:
NSPCC whistleblowing advice line is available. Staff can call 0800 0280285 - 08:00 to
20:00, Monday to Friday and 09:00 to 18:00 at weekends. The email address is:
help@nspcc.org.uk. Alternatively, staff can write to: National Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC), Weston House, 42 Curtain Road, London EC2A 3NH.
Ofsted provides guidance on how to make complaints about a provider: Complaints
procedure - Ofsted - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk).
General guidance on whistleblowing can be found via: Whistleblowing for employees.
Concerns about children's safety and welfare
3.9 If providers have concerns about children's safety or welfare, they must immediately
notify their local authority children's social care team, in line with local reporting
procedures, and, in emergencies, the police. Providers must also take into account the
government's statutory guidance 'Working Together to Safeguard Children' and 'Prevent
duty guidance for England and Wales'. All schools are required to have regard 14 to the
government's statutory guidance 'Keeping Children Safe in Education', and other
childcare providers may also find it helpful to read this guidance.
3.10 Registered providers must inform Ofsted, or the CMA with which a provider of CoDP is
registered, of any allegations of serious harm or abuse by anyone living, working, or
looking after children at the premises. This must happen whether the allegations of
harm or abuse are alleged to have been committed on the premises or elsewhere, for
example, on a visit. Registered providers must also notify Ofsted/ their CMA of the
14 Under section 175(4) of the Education Act 2002.
23
action they have taken in response to the allegations. Ofsted/the CMA must be notified
as soon as is reasonably practicable, but in any event within 14 days of the allegations
being made. A registered provider who, without a reasonable excuse, fails to do this,
commits an offence¹
Child absences
3.11 Providers must follow up on absences in a timely manner. If a child is absent for a
prolonged period of time, or if a child is absent without notification from the parent or
carer, attempts must be made to contact the child's parents and/or carers and alternative
emergency contacts. Providers must consider patterns and trends in a child's absences
and their personal circumstances and use their professional judgement when deciding if
the child's absence should be considered as prolonged. Consideration must be given to
the child's vulnerability, parent's and/or carer's vulnerability and their home life. Any
concerns must be referred to local children's social care services and/or a police welfare
check requested.
3.12 Providers must have an attendance policy that they share with parents and/or carers. This
must include expectations for reporting child absences and the actions providers will take
if a child is absent without notification or for a prolonged period of time, for example:
implementing the setting's safeguarding procedures, following up with the parents and/or
carers and contacting emergency contacts if parents and/or carers are not contactable.
Suitable people
3.13 Providers must ensure that people looking after children are suitable; they must have
the relevant qualifications, training and have passed any required checks to fulfil their
roles. Providers must take appropriate steps to verify qualifications, including in cases
where physical evidence cannot be produced. Providers must also ensure that any
person who may have regular contact with children (for example, someone living or
working on the same premises the early years provision is provided), is suitable 16
3.14 Ofsted, or the CMA with which a provider of CoDP is registered, is responsible for
completing suitability checks of:
The provider.
Every other person looking after children on domestic premises for whom the
care is being provided. This includes students, who cannot be counted in the
ratios until they have been deemed suitable.
15 Regulation 12 of the EYFS (Welfare Requirements) Regulations 2012.
16 To allow Ofsted to make these checks, providers are required to supply information to Ofsted or the relevant
CMA, as set out in Schedule 2, Part 2 of the Childcare (Early Years Register) Regulations 2008, amended by
the Childcare (Early Years Register) (Amendment) Regulations 2012.
24
Every other person living or working on any domestic premises from which the
childcare is being provided, including requiring enhanced criminal records
checks¹⁷ and barred list checks.
3.15 Registered group and school-based providers, except CoDP providers, must obtain
an enhanced criminal records check for every person aged 16 and over (including for
unsupervised volunteers, and supervised volunteers who provide personal care¹⁸)
who:
Works directly with children.
Lives on the premises on which the childcare is provided (unless there is no
access to the part of the premises when and where children are cared for)
and/or
Works on the premises on which the childcare is provided (unless they do not
work on the part of the premises where the childcare takes place, or do not work
there at times when children are present).
3.16 An additional criminal records check (or checks if more than one country) should also be
made for anyone who has lived or worked abroad¹⁹.
3.17 Providers must tell staff that they are expected to disclose any convictions, cautions,
court orders, reprimands and warnings²⁰ that may affect their suitability to work with
children (whether received before or during their employment at the setting). Providers
must not allow anyone whose suitability has not been checked, including through a
criminal records check²¹, to have unsupervised contact with children being cared for.
3.18 Providers must record information about staff qualifications and the identity checks,
vetting processes and references that have been completed (including the criminal
records check reference number, the date a check was obtained and details of who at
the setting obtained it).
17 The requirement for a criminal records check will be deemed to have been met in respect of all people living
or working in childcare settings, whose suitability was checked by Ofsted or their local authority before October
2005
18 Personal care includes helping a child, for reasons of age, illness or disability, with eating or drinking, or in
connection with toileting, washing, bathing and dressing.
19 For more information see: www.gov.uk/government/publications/criminal-records-checks-for-
overseasapplicants.
20 Except convictions or cautions that are protected for the purposes of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974.
21 DBS disclosures and barred list information are only issued to the potential employee; providers must check
the disclosure and consider whether it contains any information that would suggest the person was unsuitable
for the position, before an individual has unsupervised contact with children. Where a potential or existing
employee has subscribed to the online DBS update service, providers should check the status of the
disclosure. Where the check identifies there has been a change to the disclosure details, a new enhanced
DBS disclosure must be applied for. Before accessing the DBS update service consent to do so must be
obtained from the member of staff.
25
3.19 Providers are required to make a referral to the Disclosure and Barring Service if a
member of staff is dismissed (or would have been, had they not left the setting first)
because they have harmed a child or put a child at risk of harm²².
References
3.20 Providers must obtain a reference for any member of staff (including students and
volunteers) before they are recruited. Providers should:
Not accept open references e.g. to whom it may concern.
Not rely on applicants to obtain their reference.
Ensure any references are from the applicant's current employer, training
provider or education setting and have been completed by a senior person with
appropriate authority.
Not accept references from a family member.
Obtain verification of the individual's most recent relevant period of employment
where the applicant is not currently employed.
Secure a reference from the relevant employer from the last time the applicant
worked with children (if not currently working with children). If the applicant has
never worked with children, then ensure a reference is from their current
employer, training provider or education setting.
Ensure electronic references originate from a legitimate source.
Contact referees to clarify content where information is vague or insufficient
information is provided.
Compare the information on the application form with that in the reference and
take up any discrepancies with the applicant.
Establish the reason for the applicant leaving their current or most recent post,
and ensure any concerns are resolved satisfactorily before appointment is
confirmed.
3.21 References should be provided for previous employees upon request in a timely manner.
When asked to provide references, providers should ensure the information confirms
whether they are satisfied with the applicant's suitability to work with children and provide
the facts (not opinions) of any substantiated safeguarding concerns/allegations that meet
the harm threshold²³. They should not include information about concerns/allegations
which are unsubstantiated, unfounded, false, or malicious.
22 Section 35 Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups Act 2006.
23 The harm test is explained in the Disclosure and Barring service Guidance: Making barring referrals to the DBS
and section 35(4) Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups Act 2006 and means that a person may (a) harm a child or
26
Disqualification
3.22 A provider or a practitioner may be disqualified from registration. Providers may find
guidance about disqualification under the Childcare Act 2006 helpful. If a provider is
disqualified, they must not continue as an early years provider or be directly involved
in the management of any early years provision. When a person is disqualified,
providers must not employ that person in connection with early years provision.
3.23 A registered provider must notify Ofsted, or the CMA with which a provider of CoDP is
registered, of any significant event which is likely to affect the suitability of any person
who is in regular contact with children on the premises where childcare is provided.
The disqualification of an employee or a person living or working at domestic
premises where childcare is provided could be an example of a significant event²⁴.
3.24 The registered provider must give Ofsted, or the CMA with which a provider of CoDP
is registered, the following information about themselves or about any person who
lives or is employed in the same household as the registered provider:
Details of any order, determination, conviction, or other ground for
disqualification from registration under regulations made under section 75 of the
Childcare Act 2006.
The date of the order, determination or conviction, or the date when the other
ground for disqualification arose.
The body or court which made the order, determination or conviction, and the
sentence (if any) imposed.
A certified copy of the relevant order (in relation to an order or conviction).
3.25 The registered provider must provide this information to Ofsted/the CMA as soon as
reasonably practicable, but, in any event within 14 days of the date the provider
became aware of the information or should have reasonably become aware of it if they
had made reasonable enquiries²⁵
3.26 If a provider becomes aware of relevant information that may lead to an employee or a
person living or working at domestic premises where childcare is provided being
disqualified, the provider must take appropriate action to ensure the safety of children.
vulnerable adult, (b) cause a child or vulnerable adult to be harmed, (c) put a child or vulnerable adult at risk of
harm, (d) attempt to harm a child or vulnerable adult, or (e) incite another to harm a child or vulnerable adult.
24 Providers may find it helpful to read the Ofsted guidance on significant events: Childcare: significant events
to notify Ofsted about - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk)
25 This requirement is set out in regulation 9 of the EYFS (Welfare Requirements) Regulations 2012.
27
Staff taking medication/other substances
3.27 Staff members must not be under the influence of alcohol or any other substance which
may affect their ability to care for children. If a practitioner is taking medication which
may affect their ability to care for children, they should seek medical advice.
Practitioners must only work directly with children if the medical advice received
confirms that the medication is unlikely to impair that person's ability to look after
children properly. All medication on the premises must be stored securely, and out of
reach of children, at all times.
Smoking and vaping
3.28 Providers must not allow smoking in or on the premises when children are present or
about to be present. Practitioners should not vape or use e-cigarettes when children are
present, and providers should consider Public Health England advice on their use in
public places and workplaces.
Qualifications, training, support and skills
3.29 Providers must follow their legal responsibilities under the Equality Act 2010 including
the fair and equal treatment of practitioners regardless of age, disability, gender
reassignment, marriage and civil partnership, pregnancy and maternity, race, religion or
belief, sex and sexual orientation.
Safeguarding training
3.30 Providers must ensure that all practitioners are trained in line with the criteria set out in
Annex C. Providers must ensure that practitioners are supported and confident to
implement the setting's safeguarding policy and procedures on an ongoing basis.
Providers should read 'What to do if you're worried a child is being abused: Advice for
practitioners'.
3.31 The DSL must provide support, advice and guidance to all practitioners on an ongoing
basis, and on any specific safeguarding issue as required. The DSL must attend a
training course consistent with the criteria set out in Annex C.
3.32 Training must be renewed every two years. Providers may consider whether any staff
need to undertake annual refresher training during any two-year period to help maintain
basic skills and keep up to date with any changes to safeguarding procedures or as a
result of any safeguarding concerns that occur in the setting.
28
Training and skills
3.33 What practitioners know, plan for, and do matters for children's learning, development,
safety, and happiness in settings. Providers must ensure that all staff receive induction
training to help them understand their roles and responsibilities. Induction training must
include information about emergency evacuation procedures, safeguarding, child
protection, and health and safety issues. Providers must support staff to undertake
appropriate training and professional development opportunities to ensure they offer
quality learning and development experiences for children that continually improves.
Supervision of staff
3.34 Providers must put appropriate arrangements in place for the supervision of staff who
have contact with children and families. Effective supervision provides support,
coaching, and training for the practitioner and promotes the interests of children.
Supervision should foster a culture of mutual support, teamwork, and continuous
improvement, which encourages the confidential discussion of sensitive issues.
3.35 Supervision should provide opportunities for staff to:
Discuss any issues - particularly concerning children's development or well-
being, including child protection concerns.
Identify solutions to address issues as they arise.
Receive coaching to improve their personal effectiveness.
Paediatric First Aid
3.36 At least one person who has a current paediatric first aid (PFA) certificate must be on
the premises and available at all times when children are present and must accompany
children on outings. The certificate must be for a full course consistent with the criteria
set out in Annex A. PFA training²⁶ must be renewed every three years and be relevant
for people caring for young children and babies.
3.37 Providers should take into account the number of children, staff, and layout of premises
to ensure that a paediatric first aider is able to respond to emergencies quickly.
3.38 All staff who obtained a level 2 and/or level 3 qualification since 30 June 2016 must
obtain a PFA qualification within three months of starting work in order to be included in
26 Providers are responsible for identifying and selecting a competent training provider to deliver their PFA
training. There is no hierarchy in relation to the range of Training Providers who offer Paediatric First Aid
training, however you may want to consider one of the following: one that is a member of a Trade Body with an
approval and monitoring scheme, the Voluntary Aid Societies and those who work under Ofqual Awarding
organisations offering nationally regulated qualifications. It may also be helpful to refer to HSE's guidance
about choosing a first aid training provider, which can be found at: www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/geis3.htm
29
the required staff: child ratios at level 2 or level 3 in an early years setting²⁷ All staff
who have completed the experience-based route must obtain a PFA qualification before
they can be included in the staff:child ratios at level 3. To continue to be included in the
ratio requirement the certificate must be renewed every 3 years²⁸.
3.39 Providers should display (or make available to parents) staff PFA certificates or a list of
staff who have a current PFA certificate.
English language skills
3.40 Providers must ensure that staff have sufficient understanding and use of English to
ensure the well-being of children in their care. For example, settings must be able to:
Keep records in English.
Liaise with other agencies in English.
Summon emergency help.
Understand instructions. For example, about the safety of medicines or food
hygiene.
Key person
3.41 Each child must be assigned a key person. Their role is to help ensure that every
child's care is tailored to meet their individual needs, to help the child become familiar
with the setting, offer a settled relationship for the child and build a relationship with
their parents and/or carers. They should also help families engage with more specialist
support if appropriate.
Staff: child ratios
3.42 Staffing arrangements must meet the needs of all children and ensure their safety.
Providers must ensure that children are adequately supervised, especially whilst eating,
and decide how to use staff to ensure children's needs are met. Providers must inform
parents and/or carers about how staff are organised, and, when relevant and practical,
aim to involve them in these decisions.
3.43 Children must usually be within sight and hearing of staff and always within sight or
hearing. See paragraph 3.63 which applies when children are eating.
27 Providers can make an exception to this requirement where a staff member who obtained a level 2 and/or
level 3 qualification since 30 June 2016 is unable to gain a PFA certificate due to a disability. Such a member
of staff can still be included in the staff:child ratios if otherwise competent to carry out their childcare duties.
Where possible, such staff should attend a relevant PFA training course and obtain written evidence of
attendance.
28 Staff who obtained a level 2 and/or level 3 qualification before 30 June 2016 are not required to obtain a PFA
qualification in order to be included in the required staff:child ratios. However, the requirements of 3.36 and
3.37 still apply regardless of when qualifications were obtained.
30
3.44 In settings on the early years register, the manager of the setting must hold an approved
qualification at level 3 or above and at least half of all other staff must hold at least an
approved level 2 qualification² An approved qualification is defined by the Department
for Education as meeting the criteria set out in the Early Years Qualification
Requirements and Standards document. Approved qualifications are published on the
Early Years Qualifications List ('EYQL') on GOV.UK³⁰ except, as outlined in paragraphs
1.11 and 1.16 of the Early Years Qualification Requirements and Standards document,
those which are not individually listed on the EYQL but count as approved qualifications
if they meet certain criteria. Managers appointed on or after 4 January 2024 must have
already achieved a suitable level 2 qualification in maths³¹ or must do so within two
years of starting in the position. This also applies to existing managers moving to a new
managerial role³². Managers are responsible for ensuring staff have the right level of
maths knowledge to effectively deliver the EYFS curriculum. Managers should have at
least two years' experience of working in an early years setting, or have at least two
years' other suitable experience. The provider must ensure there is a named deputy
who, in their judgement, is capable and qualified³³ to take charge in the manager's
absence.
3.45 To count within the ratios at level 3, staff holding an Early Years Educator qualification³⁴,
and those who have received approval to be included in the ratios at level 3 after
attaining experience-based route status³⁵, must also have achieved a suitable level 2
qualification in English.
3.46 The ratio requirements below apply to the total number of staff available to work directly
with children³⁶ Exceptionally, and where the quality of care and safety and security of
children is maintained, changes to the ratios may be made. For settings providing
overnight care, the relevant ratios continue to apply and at least one member of staff
must be awake at all times.
3.47 For children aged under two:
There must be at least one member of staff for every three children.
At least one member of staff must hold an approved level 3 qualification or
have received approval to be included in the ratios at level 3 after attaining
29 These qualification requirements do not apply to out-of-school provision for reception age children, (see
paragraph 3.57).
30 https://www.gov.uk/guidance/early-years-qualifications-finder
31 As defined in the Early Years Qualification Requirements and Standards document.
32 This requirement does not apply to managers who have moved to a different managerial role with the same
provider, or those who have remained in the same role following a TUPE transfer, or where the provider has
merged with another.
33 Capable and qualified' includes having necessary skills and knowledge to cover for the manager in their
absence. A deputy does not have to have any specific qualification.
34 As defined in the Early Years Qualification Requirements and Standards document.
35 For more information on the experience-based route please refer to the Early Years Qualifications
Requirements and Standards document.
36 Ofsted may determine that providers must observe a higher staff:child ratio than outlined here to ensure the
safety and welfare of children.
31
experience-based route status³⁷ and be suitably experienced in working with
children under two.
At least half of all other staff must hold an approved level 2 qualification.
At least half of all staff must have received training that specifically addresses
the care of babies.
Where there is a room for under two-year-olds, the member of staff in charge of
that room must, in the judgement of the provider, have suitable experience of
working with under twos.
3.48 For children aged two:
There must be at least one member of staff for every five children³
At least one member of staff must hold an approved level 3 qualification, or
have received approval to be included in the ratios at level 3 after attaining
experience-based route status.
At least half of all other staff must hold an approved level 2 qualification.
3.49 For children aged three and over in registered early years provision, at any time where a
person with Qualified Teacher Status, Early Years Professional Status, Early Years
Teacher Status is working directly with children³⁹:
There must be at least one member of staff for every 13 children.
At least one other member of staff must hold an approved level 3 qualification,
or have received approval to be included in the ratios at level 3 after attaining
experience-based route status.
3.50 For children aged three and over in registered early years provision where a person with
Qualified Teacher Status, Early Years Professional Status, or Early Years Teacher
Status is not working directly with children:
There must be at least one member of staff for every eight children.
37 No more than 50% of staff included in the ratios at level 3 at a particular premises can be included on the
basis of experience-based route status at any one time. The remaining 50% or more of those included in the
staff:child ratios at level 3 must have an approved level 3 qualification or higher.
38 In a maintained school or non-maintained special school, where the two-year-olds are pupils, staff must
additionally be under the direction and supervision of a qualified or nominated teacher when carrying out
specified work (as laid out in the Education (Specified Work) (England) Regulations 2012). Specified work
broadly encompasses lesson (or curriculum) planning, delivering lessons, assessing the development,
progress and attainment of pupils and reporting on the latter. The headteacher must be satisfied that the staff
have the skills, expertise and experience needed to carry out the work and determine the appropriate level of
direction and supervision.
39 We expect the teacher (or equivalent) to be working with children for the vast majority of the time. Where
they need to be absent for short periods of time, the provider will need to ensure that quality and safety is
maintained.
32
At least one other member of staff must hold an approved level 3 qualification,
or have received approval to be included in the ratios at level 3 after attaining
experience-based route status.
At least half of all other staff must hold an approved level 2 qualification.
3.51 For children aged three and over in independent schools (including in nursery classes in
free schools and academies) where a person with Qualified Teacher Status, Early Years
Professional Status, Early Years Teacher Status, an instructor⁴⁰, or another suitably
qualified overseas trained teacher, is working directly with children:
For classes where the majority of children will reach the age of five or older
within the school year, there must be at least one member of staff for every 30
children⁴¹.
For all other classes there must be at least one other member of staff for every
13 children.
At least one other member of staff must hold an approved level 3 qualification,
or have received approval to be included in the ratios at level 3 after attaining
experience-based route status.
3.52 For children aged three and over in independent schools (including in nursery classes in
free schools and academies) where there is no person with Qualified Teacher Status,
Early Years Professional Status, Early Years Teacher Status no instructor, and no
suitably qualified overseas trained teacher, working directly with children:
There must be at least one member of staff for every eight children.
At least one member of staff must hold an approved level 3 qualification, or
have received approval to be included in the ratios at level 3 after attaining
experience-based route status.
At least half of all other staff must hold an approved level 2 qualification.
3.53 For children aged three and over in maintained nursery schools and nursery classes in
maintained schools⁴²:
40 An instructor is a person at the school who provides education which consists of instruction in any art or
skill, or in any subject or group of subjects, in circumstances where: (a) special qualifications or experience
or both are required for such instruction; and (b) the person or body of persons responsible for the
management of the school is satisfied as to the qualifications or experience (or both) of the person providing
education.
41 Subject to any permitted exceptions under The Schools Admissions (Infant Class Sizes) Regulations 2012
S.I. 2012/10.
42 Where schools have provision run by the governing body (under section 27 of the Education Act 2002) for
three- and four-year-olds who are not pupils of the school, they can apply: a 1:13 ratio where a person with a
33
There must be at least one member of staff for every 13 children⁴³.
At least one member of staff must be a school teacher as defined by section
122 of the Education Act 2002⁴⁴
At least one other member of staff must hold an approved level 3
qualification⁴⁵ or have received approval to be included in the ratios at level 3
after attaining experience-based route status.
3.54 Reception classes in maintained schools and academies are subject to infant class size
legislation⁴⁶, which is limited to 30 pupils⁴⁷ per school teacher⁴⁸ (subject to permitted
exceptions) while an ordinary teaching session is conducted. 'School teachers' do not
include teaching assistants, higher level teaching assistants, or other support staff.
Consequently, in an ordinary teaching session, a school must employ sufficient school
teachers to enable it to teach its infant classes in groups of no more than 30 per school
teacher⁴⁹.
3.55 Some schools may choose to mix their reception classes with groups of younger
children (for example, nursery pupils, non-pupils, or younger children from a registered
provider). In such cases they must determine ratios within mixed groups, guided by all
relevant ratio requirements and by the needs of individual children within the group. In
exercising this discretion, the school must comply with the statutory requirements
relating to the education of children of compulsory school age and infant class sizes.
Schools' partner providers must meet the relevant ratio requirements for their provision.
suitable level 6 qualification is working directly with the children (as in paragraph 3.42); or a 1:8 ratio where a
person with a suitable level 6 qualification is not working directly with children but at least one member of staff
present holds a level 3 qualification, or have received approval to be included in the ratios at level 3 after
attaining experience-based route status[ ](as in paragraph 3.43).
43 Where children in nursery classes attend school for longer than the school day or in the school holidays, in
provision run directly by the governing body or the proprietor, with no teacher present, a ratio of one member of
staff to every eight children can be applied if at least one member of staff holds a full and relevant level 3
qualification, or have received approval to be included in the ratios at level 3 after attaining experience-based
route status, and at least half of all other staff hold a full and relevant level 2 qualification.
44 See also the Education (School Teachers' Prescribed Qualifications, etc) Order 2003 and the Education
(School Teachers' Qualifications) (England) Regulations 2003.
45 Provided that the person meets all relevant staff qualification requirements as required by The School
Staffing (England) Regulations 2009.
46 Academies are required by their funding agreements to comply with the School Admissions Code and the
law relating to admissions although the Secretary of State has the power to vary this requirement where there
is demonstratable need.
47 The School Admissions (Infant Class Size) Regulations 2012 limit the size of infant classes.
48 As defined by section 122 of the Education Act 2002.
49 The Specified Work Regulations 2012 allow a non-teacher to carry out the work of the teacher ("specified
work") where the non-teacher is assisting or supporting the work of the teacher, is subject to the teacher's
direction and supervision as arranged with the headteacher, and the headteacher is satisfied that that person
has the skills, expertise and experience required to carry out the specified work. In an academy a teacher can
have whatever qualification the trust regard as appropriate to teach an infant class, in line with admissions law.
34
3.56 Providers must not include anyone aged under 17 in ratios, except apprentices who may
be included in ratios from the age of 16. Providers must not allow anyone aged under
17 to care for children unsupervised at any time. Providers may count students and
long-term volunteers (aged 17 or over) and apprentices (aged 16 or over) in ratios at the
level below their level of study⁵⁰ but only if the provider is satisfied they are suitable (as
in paragraphs 3.13 to 3.16) competent and responsible, and they hold a valid and
current paediatric first aid qualification.
Before/after school care and holiday provision
3.57 Where the provision is solely before/after school⁵¹ care or holiday provision for
children who normally attend reception class (or older) during the school day, there
must be sufficient staff as for a class of 30 children. It is for providers to determine
how many staff are needed to ensure the safety and welfare of children, bearing in
mind the type(s) of activity and the age and needs of the children. It is also for
providers to determine what qualifications, if any, the manager and/or staff should
have. See details on page 8 for the learning and development requirements for
providers offering care exclusively before/after school or during the school holidays.
Health
Medicines
3.58 Providers must promote the good health, including the oral health, of the children they
look after.
3.59 They must have a procedure, which must be discussed with parents and/or carers, for
taking appropriate action if children are ill or infectious. This procedure must also cover
the necessary steps to prevent the spread of infection⁴⁷.
3.60 Providers must have and implement a policy, and procedures, for administering
medicines to children. It must include systems for obtaining information about a child's
needs for medicines, and for keeping this information up to date. Staff must have
training if the administration of medicine requires medical or technical knowledge.
Prescription medicines must not be administered unless they have been prescribed for
a child by a doctor, dentist, nurse, or pharmacist (medicines containing aspirin should
only be given if prescribed by a doctor).
50 A student or apprentice studying towards an approved Level 3 qualification (including qualifications at levels
4, 5 and 6) may count within the Level 2 ratio. A student or apprentice studying towards an approved Level 6
qualification (one that gives them the status of EYTS or QTS) may count within the Level 3 ratio.
51 'School' means maintained schools, non-maintained schools, independent schools and academies. 47
Guidance on health protection in children and young people settings which sets out when and for how long
children need to be excluded from settings, when treatment/medication is required and where to get further
advice can be found at Health protection in children and young people settings, including education -
GOV.UK
35
3.61 Medicine (both prescription and non-prescription⁵²) must only be administered to a child
where written permission for that particular medicine has been obtained from the child's
parent and/or carer. Providers must keep a written record each time a medicine is
administered to a child and inform the child's parents and/or carers on the same day the
medicine has been taken, or as soon as reasonably practicable.
Food and drink
3.62 Where children are provided with meals, snacks, and drinks, these must be healthy,
balanced and nutritious. To understand how to meet this requirement, providers must
have regard to the 'Early Years Foundation Stage nutrition guidance. Fresh drinking
water must always be available and accessible to children.
Safer eating
3.63 Whilst children are eating there should always be a member of staff in the room with a
valid paediatric first aid certificate for a full course consistent with the criteria set out in
Annex A.
3.64 Before a child is admitted to the setting the provider must obtain information about any
special dietary requirements, preferences, food allergies and intolerances that the child
has, and any special health requirements. This information must be shared by the
provider with all staff involved in the preparing and handling of food. At each mealtime
and snack time providers must be clear about who is responsible for checking that the
food being provided meets all the requirements for each child.
3.65 Providers must have ongoing discussions with parents and/or carers and, where
appropriate, health professionals to develop allergy action plans for managing any
known allergies and intolerances. This information must be kept up to date by the
provider and shared with all staff. Providers should refer to the British Society for Allergy
and Clinical Immunology (BSACI) allergy action plan. Providers must ensure that all
staff are aware of the symptoms and treatments for allergies and anaphylaxis, the
differences between allergies and intolerances and that children can develop allergies
at any time, especially during the introduction of solid foods which is sometimes called
complementary feeding or weaning. Providers should refer to the NHS advice on food
allergies: Food allergy - NHS (www.nhs.uk) and treatment of anaphylaxis: Anaphylaxis
- NHS (www.nhs.uk).
3.66 Providers must have ongoing discussions with parents and/or carers about the stage
their child is at in regard to introducing solid foods, including to understand the textures
the child is familiar with. Assumptions must not be made based on age. Providers must
52 Non-prescription medicines can include those that can be purchased from pharmacies (including some
over the counter medicines which can only be purchased from a pharmacy), health shops and supermarkets.
See also BMA advice: Prescribing over-the-counter medicines in nurseries and schools (bma.org.uk)
36
prepare food in a suitable way for each child's individual developmental needs, working
with parents and/or carers to help children move on to the next stage at a pace right for
the child. The NHS has some advice providers should refer to: Weaning - Start for Life -
NHS (www.nhs.uk).
3.67 Providers must prepare food in a way to prevent choking. This guidance on food safety
for young children: Food safety - Help for early years providers - GOV.UK
(education.gov.uk) includes advice on food and drink to avoid, how to reduce the risk of
choking and links to other useful resources for early years providers.
3.68 Babies and young children should be seated safely in a highchair or appropriately sized
low chair while eating. Where possible there should be a designated eating space
where distractions are minimised.
3.69 Children must always be within sight and hearing of a member of staff whilst eating.
Choking can be completely silent, therefore, it is important for providers to be alert to
when a child may be starting to choke. Where possible, providers should sit facing
children whilst they eat, so they can make sure children are eating in a way to prevent
choking and so they can prevent food sharing and be aware of any unexpected allergic
reactions.
3.70 When a child experiences a choking incident that requires intervention, providers should
record details of where and how the child choked and ensure parents and/or carers are
made aware. The records should be reviewed periodically to identify if there are trends
or common features of incidents that could be addressed to reduce the risk of choking.
Appropriate action should be taken to address any identified concerns.
Food and drink facilities
3.71 There must be an area adequately equipped to provide healthy meals, snacks and
drinks for children as necessary. There must be suitable facilities for the hygienic
preparation of food for children, if necessary, including suitable sterilisation equipment
for babies' food. Providers must be confident that those responsible for preparing and
handling food are competent to do so. All staff involved in preparing and handling food
must receive training in food hygiene.
Food poisoning
3.72 Registered providers must notify Ofsted, or the CMA with which a provider of CoDP is
registered, of any food poisoning affecting two or more children cared for on the
premises. This must be done as soon as is reasonably practicable, but, in any event,
within 14 days of the incident. A registered provider who, without reasonable excuse,
does not meet this requirement commits an offence.
37
Supporting and understanding children's behaviour
3.73 Providers are responsible for supporting, understanding, and managing children's
behaviour in an appropriate way.
3.74 Providers must not give or threaten corporal punishment or any punishment which could
negatively affect a child's well-being. Providers must take reasonable steps to ensure
that corporal punishment is not given by anyone who is caring for or is in regular
contact with a child, or by anyone living or working in the premises where care is
provided. Any early years provider who does not meet these requirements commits an
offence. A person will not be considered to have used corporal punishment (and
therefore will not have committed an offence) if physical intervention⁵³ was taken to
avert immediate danger of personal injury to any person (including the child) or to
manage a child's behaviour if absolutely necessary.
3.75 Providers must keep a record of any occasion where physical intervention is used, and
parents and/or carers must be informed on the same day, or as soon as reasonably
practicable.
Special educational needs
3.76 Early years providers must have arrangements in place to support children with Special
Educational Needs and Disabilities (SEND). Maintained schools, academies and
maintained nursery schools are required⁵⁴ to identify a member of staff to act as Special
Educational Needs Co-ordinator (SENCO) and other providers (in group provision) are
expected to identify a SENCO. Maintained schools, academies and maintained nursery
schools and all providers who are funded by the local authority to deliver early
education places are required⁵⁵ to have regard to the 0-25 SEND Code of Practice.
Other providers may find it helpful to familiarise themselves with the early years section
of the 0-25 SEND Code of Practice.
Safety and suitability of premises, environment and equipment
Accident or injury
3.77 Providers must ensure a first aid box with appropriate items for use on children is
always accessible. Providers must keep a written record of accidents or injuries and
first aid treatment. Providers must inform parents and/or carers of any accident or injury
53 Physical intervention is where practitioners use reasonable force to prevent children from injuring themselves
or others or damaging property.
54 See section 67 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and section 83 for the definition of 'mainstream
schools'.
55 Section 123 School Standards and Framework Act 1998 requires providers (and others) delivering early
years provision funded by the local authority to have regard to the SEND Code of Practice in the provision of
early years education. Section 77 of the Children and Families Act 2014 also requires these and other bodies
to have regard to the SEND Code of Practice in exercising their functions under Part 3 of the Act.
38
sustained by the child on the same day as, or as soon as reasonably practicable after,
and of any first aid treatment given.
3.78 Registered providers must notify Ofsted, or the CMA with which a provider of CoDP is
registered, of any serious accident, illness, or injury to, or death of, any child while in
their care, and of the action taken. This must be done as soon as is reasonably
practicable, but in any event, within 14 days of the incident occurring. A registered
provider who, without reasonable excuse, does not meet this requirement commits an
offence. Providers must notify local child protection agencies of any serious accident or
injury to, or the death of, any child while in their care, and must act on any advice from
those agencies.
Safety of premises
3.79 Providers must ensure that their premises, including overall floor space and outdoor
spaces, are fit for purpose and suitable for the age of children cared for and the
activities provided on the premises. Providers must comply with requirements of health
and safety legislation, including fire safety and hygiene requirements.
3.80 Providers must take reasonable steps to ensure the safety of children, staff, and others
on the premises in the case of fire or any other emergency. Providers must have:
An emergency evacuation procedure.
Appropriate fire detection and control equipment (for example, fire alarms,
smoke detectors, fire blankets and/or fire extinguishers) which is in working
order.
Fire exits must be clearly identifiable, and fire doors free of obstruction and easily
opened from the inside.
Indoor space requirements
3.81 The premises and equipment must be organised in a way that meets the needs of
children. Providers must meet the following indoor space requirements⁵⁶ where indoor
activity in a building(s) forms the main part of (or is integral) to the provision:
Children under two years: 3.5m² per child.
Two-year-olds: 2.5m² per child.
Children aged three to five years: 2.3m² per child.
3.82 Where the space standards are applied, providers cannot increase the number of
children on roll because they additionally use an outside area. Forest and other
56 These judgements should be based on useable areas of the rooms used by the children, not including
storage areas, thoroughfares, dedicated staff areas, cloakrooms, utility rooms, kitchens and toilets.
39
exclusively outdoor provision (where children are outside all or almost all of the time) is
not required to meet the space standards above, as long as children's needs can be
met. For this kind of provision, indoor space requirements can be used as a guide for
the minimum area needed.
Outdoor access
3.83 Providers must provide access to an outdoor play area. If that is not possible, they must
ensure that outdoor activities are planned and taken on a daily basis (unless
circumstances make this inappropriate, for example unsafe weather conditions).
Providers must follow their legal responsibilities under the Equality Act 2010 (for
example, the provisions on reasonable adjustments).
Sleeping arrangements
3.84 Sleeping children must be frequently checked to ensure that they are safe. Being safe
includes ensuring that cots and bedding are in good condition and suited to the age of
the child, and that babies are placed down to sleep safely in line with the latest
government safety guidance: Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) - NHS
(www.nhs.uk). Practitioners should read NHS advice on safety of sleeping babies:
Reduce the risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) - NHS (www.nhs.uk).
Baby room
3.85 There should be a separate baby room for children under the age of two. However,
providers must ensure that children in a baby room have contact with older children and
are moved into the older age group when appropriate.
Toilets and intimate hygiene
3.86 Providers must ensure:
There is an adequate number of toilets and hand basins available - there should
usually be separate toilet facilities for adults.
There are suitable hygienic changing facilities for changing any children who are
in nappies.
Children's privacy is considered and balanced with safeguarding and support
needs when changing nappies and toileting.
There is an adequate supply of clean bedding, towels, spare clothes, and any
other necessary items.
Organising premises for confidentiality and safeguarding
3.87 Providers must ensure:
40
There is an area where staff may talk to parents and/or carers confidentially.
There is an area for staff to take breaks away from areas being used by
children.
Children are only released into the care of individuals of whom the parent has
explicitly notified the provider.
Children do not leave the premises unsupervised.
They take all reasonable steps to prevent unauthorised persons entering the
premises and have an agreed procedure for checking the identity of visitors.
They consider what additional measures are necessary when children stay
overnight.
Insurance
3.88 Providers must carry the appropriate insurance (e.g. public liability insurance) to cover
all premises from which they provide childcare.
Safety on outings
3.89 Children must be kept safe while on outings. Providers must assess potential risks or
hazards for the children and must identify the steps to be taken to remove, minimise
and manage those risks and hazards. The assessment must include consideration of
staff to child ratios. The risk assessment does not necessarily need to be in writing; this
is up to providers.
3.90 Vehicles transporting children, and the driver of those vehicles, must be adequately
insured.
Risk assessment
3.91 Providers must ensure that they take all reasonable steps to ensure staff and children in
their care are not exposed to risks and must be able to demonstrate how they are
managing risks 57 Providers must determine where it is helpful to make some written
risk assessments in relation to specific issues, to inform staff practice, and to
demonstrate how they are managing risks if asked by parents and/or carers or
inspectors. Risk assessments should identify aspects of the environment that need to
be checked on a regular basis, when and by whom those aspects will be checked, and
how the risk will be removed or minimised.
57 Guidance on risk assessments, including where written ones may be required where five or more staff are
employed, can be obtained from the Health and Safety Executive: Managing risks and risk assessment at work
- Overview -HSE
41
Information and record keeping
3.92 Providers must maintain records, obtain and share relevant information (with parents
and carers, other professionals working with the child, the police, social services and
Ofsted or their CMA, as appropriate). This is to ensure their setting is safe and
efficiently managed, and the needs of all children are met⁵⁸. Providers must enable a
regular two-way flow of information with parents and/or carers (and between other
providers, if a child is attending more than one setting). If requested, providers should
incorporate parents' and/or carers' comments into children's records.
3.93 Records must be easily accessible and available (these may be kept securely off the
premises). Confidential information and records about staff and children must be held
securely and only accessible and available to those who have a right or professional
need to see them⁵⁹. Providers must be aware of their responsibilities under the Data
Protection legislation⁵⁶ and, where relevant, the Freedom of Information Act 2000.
3.94 Providers must ensure that all staff understand the need to protect the privacy of the
children in their care, as well the legal requirements that exist to ensure that information
relating to the child is handled in a way that ensures confidentiality. Parents and/or
carers must be given access to all records about their child, provided that no relevant
exemptions apply to their disclosure under the Data Protection Act⁶⁰.
3.95 Records relating to individual children must be retained for a reasonable period of time
after they have left the provision⁶¹.
Information about the child
3.96 Providers must record the following information for each child in their care:
Full name.
Date of birth.
Name and address of every parent and/or carer who is known to the provider.
58 Guidance on sharing information with relevant services when there are safeguarding concerns is available
via: Information sharing advice for safeguarding practitioners - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk). Refer also to: Victims
and Prisoners Act 2024 (legislation.gov.uk)
59 The National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) has published helpful guidance on cyber security:
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/early-years-practitioners-using-cyber-security-to-protect-your-setings
56
This includes the Data Protection Act 2018 and General Data Protection Regulation 2018 see: Data
protection: The Data Protection Act - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk)
60 The Data Protection Act 2018 (DPA) gives parents and carers the right to access information about their
child that a provider holds. However, the DPA also sets out specific exemptions under which certain personal
information may, under specific circumstances, be withheld from release. For example, a relevant professional
will need to give careful consideration as to whether the disclosure of certain information about a child could
cause harm either to the child or any other individual. It is therefore essential that all providers/staff in early
years settings have an understanding of how data protection laws operate. Further guidance can be found on
the website of the Information Commissioner's Office at: https://ico.org.uk/fororganisations/guide-to-the-
general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/
61 Individual providers should determine how long to retain records relating to individual children.
42
Information about any other person who has parental responsibility for the child.
Which parent(s) and/or carer(s) the child normally lives with.
Emergency contact details for parents and/or carers. Where possible, settings
should hold more than two emergency contact numbers for each child.
Information for parents and carers
3.97 Providers must share the following information with parents and/or carers:
How the EYFS is being delivered in the setting, and how parents and/or carers
can access more information.
The range and type of activities and experiences provided for children, the daily
routines of the setting, and how parents and carers can share learning at home.
How the setting supports children with special educational needs and
disabilities.
Food and drinks provided for children.
Details of the provider's policies and procedures - making copies available on
request. This includes the procedure to be followed in the event of a parent
and/or carer failing to collect a child at the appointed time, or in the event of a
child going missing at, or away from, the setting.
How staffing in the setting is organised.
The name of their child's key person and their role.
A telephone number for parents and/or carers to contact the provider in an
emergency.
Complaints
3.98 Providers must put in place a written procedure for dealing with concerns and
complaints from parents and/or carers, and must keep a written record of any
complaints, and their outcome. All providers must:
Investigate written complaints relating to how they are fulfilling the EYFS
requirements.
Notify the person who made the complaint of the outcome of the investigation
within 28 days of having received the complaint.
Make a record of complaints available to Ofsted, or the CMA with which a
provider of CoDP is registered, on request.
43
3.99 Providers must make available to parents and/or carers the details about how to contact
Ofsted, or the CMA with which a provider of CoDP is registered, if they believe the
provider is not meeting the EYFS requirements.
Inspections and quality assurance visits
3.100 If providers become aware that they are to be inspected by Ofsted or have a quality
assurance visit by the CMA, they must notify parents and/or carers. After an inspection
by Ofsted or a quality assurance visit by their CMA, providers must supply a copy of the
report to parents and/or carers of children attending on a regular basis.
Information about the provider
3.101 Providers must hold the following documentation:
Name, home address and telephone number of the provider and any other
person living or employed on the premises.
Name, home address and telephone number of anyone else who will regularly
be in unsupervised contact with the children attending the early years provision.
A daily record of the names of the children being cared for on the premises, their
hours of attendance and the names of each child's key person.
Their certificate of registration (which must be displayed at the setting and
shown to parents and/or carers on request).
Changes that must be notified to Ofsted
3.102 All registered early years providers must notify Ofsted (but see paragraph 3.104) of:
Any change to the address of the premises (and must obtain prior approval to
operate from those premises where appropriate).
Any change to the premises which may affect the space available to children
and the quality of childcare available to them.
Any change to the name or address of the provider, or the provider's other
contact information.
Any change to the person who is managing the early years provision.
Any proposal to change the hours during which childcare is to be provided which
will entail the provision of overnight care.
Any significant event which is likely to affect the suitability of the early years
provider to look after children.
Any significant event which is likely to affect the suitability of any person who
cares for/is in regular contact with children on the premises.
44
Where the early years provision is provided by a company, any change in the
name or registered number of the company.
Where the early years provision is provided by a charity, any change in the
name or registration number of the charity.
Where the childcare is provided by a partnership, body corporate or
unincorporated association, any change to the "nominated individual".
Where the childcare is provided by a partnership, body corporate or
unincorporated association whose sole or main purpose is the provision of
childcare, any change to the individuals who are partners in, or a director,
secretary or other officer or members of its governing body.
3.103 Where providers are required to notify Ofsted about a change of person except for
managers, as specified in paragraph 3.102 above, providers must give Ofsted the new
person's name, any former names or aliases, date of birth, and home address. If there
is a change of manager, providers must notify Ofsted that a new manager has been
appointed. Where it is reasonably practical to do so, this must be done in advance of
the change happening. In other cases, this must be done as soon as is reasonably
practical but, in any event, within 14 days. A registered provider who, without
reasonable excuse, fails to comply with these requirements commits an offence.
3.104 Please note that where providers of CoDP are registered with a CMA the above
notifications should be given to their CMA, not Ofsted.
Other Legal Duties
3.105 The EYFS requirements sit alongside other legal obligations and do not supersede
or replace any other legislation which providers must still meet. For example, where
provision is taking place in maintained schools there is other legislation in place with
which headteachers, teachers and other practitioners must comply with. Other duties
on providers include:
Employment laws.
Anti-discriminatory legislation.
Health and safety legislation.
Data collection regulations⁶
Duty of care.
62 Refer also to: Victims and Prisoners Act 2024 (legislation.gov.uk)
45
Annex A: Criteria for effective Paediatric First Aid (PFA)
training
1. Training is designed for workers caring for young children in the absence of their
parents and is appropriate to the age of the children being cared for.
2. Following training, an assessment of competence leads to the award of a certificate.
3. The certificate must be renewed every three years.
4. Adequate resuscitation and other equipment including baby and junior models must
be provided, so that all trainees are able to practice and demonstrate techniques.
5. The emergency PFA course should be undertaken face-to-face⁶³ and last for a
minimum of 6 hours (excluding breaks) and cover the following areas:
Be able to assess an emergency situation and prioritise what action to take
Help a baby/child who is unresponsive and breathing normally.
Help a baby/child who is unresponsive and not breathing normally.
Help a baby/child who is having a seizure.
Help a baby/child who is choking.
Help a baby/child who is bleeding.
Help a baby/child who is suffering from shock caused by severe blood loss
(hypovolemic shock).
6. The full PFA course should last for a minimum of 12 hours (excluding breaks) and
cover the elements listed below in addition to the areas set out in paragraph 5 (the
emergency PFA training elements outlined in paragraph 5 should be delivered face-
to-face).
Help a baby/child who is suffering from anaphylactic shock.
Help a baby/child who has had an electric shock.
Help a baby/child who has burns or scalds.
Help a baby/child who has a suspected fracture.
Help a baby/child with head, neck or back injuries.
Help a baby/child who is suspected of being poisoned.
Help a baby/child with a foreign body in eyes, ears or nose.
Help a baby/child with an eye injury.
Help a baby/child with a bite or sting.
Help a baby/child who is suffering from the effects of extreme heat or cold.
Help a baby/child having: a diabetic emergency; an asthma attack; an allergic
reaction; meningitis; and/or febrile convulsions.
63 Face-to-face means trainers are physically present with their trainees. This excludes the use of online
platforms.
46
Understand the role and responsibilities of the paediatric first aider (including
appropriate contents of a first aid box and how to record accidents and incidents).
7. Providers should consider whether paediatric first aiders need to undertake annual
refresher training, during any three-year certification period to help maintain basic
skills and keep up to date with any changes to PFA procedures.
47
Annex B: Statutory guidance for the Reception Baseline
Assessment
Summary
About this Annex
This is a statutory document from the Department for Education. The statutory requirements
that providers must comply with when administering the Reception Baseline Assessment
(RBA), are indicated in this Annex by the use of the word "must".
Additionally, providers must take into account other provisions in this Annex and should not
depart from them unless there is good reason for doing so. These provisions are indicated
by the use of the word "should".
This Annex covers all intakes in reception within an academic year, including during autumn,
spring, and summer terms.
Review date
This Annex will be reviewed on a rolling basis and will remain in force until further notice.
Schools must also administer the assessment in accordance with administration guidance
and the assessment and reporting arrangements published annually on behalf of the
Secretary of State on gov.uk.
What legislation does this Annex refer to?
The Childcare Act 2006.
The Early Years Foundation Stage (Learning and Development Requirements) Order
2007 underpins the requirement for schools to administer the RBA.
Who must administer the RBA?
School leaders, school staff and governing bodies in all maintained schools (including
maintained special schools), infant and first schools, academies and free schools with a
reception cohort.
Ministry of Defence (MoD) schools
Who does this Annex not apply to?
Independent schools or nurseries
Overseas schools that are not Ministry of Defence schools
Maintained nursery schools, even those with a reception cohort
Home educated pupils
Childminders
48
Introduction and Purpose
The RBA is a short assessment, taken within the first six weeks of a child starting reception.
Accountability and Progress
1. The RBA assesses a child in early mathematics, literacy, communication and language.
The purpose of the RBA is to form the starting point for primary progress measures. Data
from the RBA is compared to key stage 2 outcomes 7 years later to form the overall
progress measure for a school.
2. The RBA is not used to make judgements about early years provision, either current or
retrospective. It is solely intended for use within the primary progress measure.
Assessment Data
3. The RBA and its data should not be used for any other purpose apart from creating
primary progress measures. Data collected and produced from the assessment will be
stored in the National Pupil Database (NPD). The data, including numerical scores, is not
shared with external bodies, including schools, teachers, pupils or parents/carers.
4. The RBA is not suitable as a formative or diagnostic assessment. Scores are not shared
or published to prevent any labelling and streaming of children or judgement of early
years providers. Instead, teachers receive a series of narrative statements informing
them of how the child performed on the day. There is no expected standard and children
cannot pass or fail.
Assessment administration
Timing
5. Schools have a window of six weeks in which they must administer the assessment. This
begins as soon as each child starts reception. The six-week period applies for autumn,
winter and summer intakes, or any pupil that joins a school mid-term and has not
previously taken the RBA.
6. The assessment can be carried out at any time within those six weeks, within the school
day. The assessment must be administered within this window. The RBA does not have
to be completed in one sitting and practitioners may pause the assessment at any time
they feel is appropriate.
Administration of the RBA
7. Schools must administer the assessment in accordance with administration guidance
and assessment and reporting arrangements published annually on gov.uk.
8. The RBA is a short, interactive assessment. Although the assessment is not timed, it has
been designed to take around 20 minutes. The assessment must be carried out by a
49
teacher, teaching assistant, early years practitioner or any other trained education
professional. Whoever carries out the RBA should be familiar with the child taking the
assessment.
Security of assessment materials
9. Headteachers must ensure the assessment is administered securely and continue to
keep any materials used as part of the RBA administration secure and ensure that
confidentiality is maintained at all times.
10. Schools must not use assessment materials for any purpose other than administering the
assessment.
11. Headteachers must ensure teachers and all other staff who may handle the materials
understand the need to maintain the integrity, security and confidentiality of the
assessment.
Inclusion and participation
Schools for Inclusion
12. All maintained schools and academies with a reception cohort must participate in the
assessment. This includes, but is not limited to:
infant and first schools; and
special schools.
13. The RBA must be administered to all pupils registered in a reception class in the schools
specified, except in circumstances where a headteacher decides it is not appropriate for
a pupil to participate in the RBA. See "Pupils for Inclusion" for more information.
14. The reception to key stage 2 progress measure will be applicable to the vast majority of
schools in the primary phase - those where pupils enter in reception and leave in year 6.
Other school types - infant, first, junior, and middle schools - will be expected to ensure
their pupils make good progress and, like all schools, to be able to explain to Ofsted how
they have planned and implemented their curriculum and what impact that is having for
pupils. Key stage 2 attainment information will continue to be available for middle and
junior schools.
Pupils for Inclusion
15. All assessments are required to meet Ofqual's regulatory framework which states
'assessment should minimise bias, differentiating only on the basis of each pupil's level
of attainment. A pupil should not be disadvantaged by factors that do not relate to what is
being tested.'
16. The RBA has been developed to be an inclusive assessment and to be accessible to a
majority of pupils. It has been designed so that pupils with SEND and those learning
50
English as an additional language can participate.
17. Modifications are available for pupils with specific needs. Schools should consider
applying accessibility settings to the standard assessment where appropriate.
18. Headteachers must make the final decision about whether it is appropriate for a pupil to
participate in the RBA. In exceptional circumstances, headteachers may decide that a
pupil is unable to access both assessment components, even when making appropriate
adaptations. In these circumstances headteachers should discuss the decision with
parents and teachers.
Pupil mobility
19. All pupil's RBA scores will be associated with their Unique Pupil Number (UPN) and
stored in the National Pupil Database (NPD). The score will therefore remain with a pupil,
even if they move schools. Because scores are not shared with schools, there is no
requirement to include any RBA result on a pupil's common transfer file (CTF).
Maladministration and monitoring
20. Maladministration is monitored via the RBA digital system, and the Secretary of State
reserves the right to amend or annul results should a school or individual be found to be
administering the assessment incorrectly. Further information regarding
maladministration of the RBA can be found in the RBA assessment and reporting
arrangements, published annually on gov.uk.
Responsibilities
Headteachers' responsibilities
21. Headteachers must sign a Headteacher Declaration Form (HDF). This must be
completed once each academic year, as is currently the case for all statutory National
Curriculum assessments in key stages 1 and 2. All requirements of the HDF must be
adhered to.
22. Headteachers must ensure that the RBA is being delivered in accordance with this
Annex, the assessment and reporting arrangements and administration guidance which
are published annually on gov.uk. Investigations of maladministration may result from not
following these statutory obligations for the RBA.
Local authority responsibilities
23. There are no routine Local Authority (LA) monitoring arrangements for this assessment.
Ofqual responsibilities
24. This assessment falls under Ofqual's regulatory framework for national assessments.
51
Ofsted responsibilities
25. Ofsted does not have routine access to the numerical data produced by the assessment,
but individual circumstances will be considered to grant access if required for a specific
purpose. The RBA should not form a part of any Ofsted inspection.
26. Ofsted will have access to individual schools' progress scores, when the progress
measure is released at the end of key stage 2.
Interaction with other assessments
Early Years Foundation Stage Profile
27. The EYFSP and RBA are enforced by the same legislation, however they are distinct
and serve different purposes. There will be no interaction between the two assessments
in practice. Schools must continue to carry out both statutory assessments.
Statutory Trialling
28. For the purpose of developing assessments in reception, a sample of schools are asked
to take part in statutory trialling to inform the development of the RBA. Selected schools
are contacted in advance and must administer the assessment according to the trialling
instructions provided.
29. Pupils who are unable to access the RBA should not take part in statutory trials.
Further information
Useful resources
Reception baseline assessment framework
52
Annex C: Criteria for effective safeguarding training
1. Training is designed for staff caring for 0-5 year olds and is appropriate to the age of the
children being cared for.
2. The safeguarding training for all practitioners must cover the following areas:
What is meant by the term safeguarding.
The main categories of abuse, harm and neglect.
The factors, situation and actions that could lead or contribute to abuse, harm or
neglect.
How to work in ways that safeguard children from abuse, harm and neglect.
How to identify signs of possible abuse, harm and neglect at the earliest opportunity.
These may include:
Significant changes in children's behaviour.
A decline in children's general well-being.
Unexplained bruising, marks or signs of possible abuse or neglect.
Concerning comments or behaviour from children.
Inappropriate behaviour from practitioners, or any other person working with the
children. This could include inappropriate sexual comments; excessive one-to-one
attention beyond what is required through their role; or inappropriate sharing of
images.
Any reasons to suspect neglect or abuse outside the setting, for example in the
child's home or that a child may experience emotional abuse or physical abuse
because of witnessing domestic abuse or coercive control or that a girl may have been
subjected to (or is at risk of) female genital mutilation.
How to respond, record and effectively refer concerns or allegations related to
safeguarding in a timely and appropriate way.
The setting's safeguarding policy and procedures.
Legislation, national policies, codes of conduct and professional practice in relation to
safeguarding.
Roles and responsibilities of practitioners and other relevant professionals involved in
safeguarding.
3. Training for the designated safeguarding lead (DSL) should take account of any advice
from the local safeguarding partners or local authority on appropriate training courses. In
addition to the areas set out in paragraph 2, training for the DSL must cover the elements
listed below:
How to build a safe organisational culture.
How to ensure safe recruitment.
53
How to develop and implement safeguarding policies and procedures.
If applicable, how to support and work with other practitioners to safeguard children.
Local child protection procedures and how to liaise with local statutory children's
services agencies and with the local safeguarding partners to safeguard children.
How to refer and escalate concerns (including as described at paragraph 3.9 of the
EYFS).
How to manage and monitor allegations of abuse against other staff.
How to ensure internet safety.
54
Department
for Education
© Crown copyright 2025
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0, except
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit
nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/opengovernment-licence/version/3
Where we have identified any third-party copyright information, you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
About this publication:
enquiries www.gov.uk/contact-dfe download
www.gov.uk/government/publications
Follow us on Twitter: @educationgovuk
Connect with us on Facebook: facebook.com/educationgovuk
