Department
for Education
Every Child Achieving
and Thriving
CP 1508-I
DIEU
ET
MON DROIT
Government of the United Kingdom
Department for Education
Every Child Achieving
and Thriving
Presented to Parliament by the Secretary of State for Education
by Command of His Majesty
February 2026
CP 1508-I
OGL
©
Crown copyright 2026
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3
Where we have identified any third-party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is also available on our website at www.gov.uk/government/publications
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at www.gov.uk/contact-dfe
ISBN 978-1-5286-6032-7
E03470295 02/26
Printed on paper containing 40% recycled fibre content minimum
Printed in the UK by HH Associates Ltd. on behalf of the Controller of His Majesty's
Stationery Office
3
Contents
Foreword
4
Executive Summary
6
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
17
Chapter 1: Our children's futures
17
Chapter 2: Narrow to broad
23
Chapter 3: Sidelined to included
39
Chapter 4: Withdrawn to engaging
60
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
76
Chapter 5: Support and investment in high-quality staff
76
Chapter 6: Collaboration between schools and with other partners
85
Chapter 7: Enabling innovation and ambition
91
Implementation: Delivering our ambition for every child
101
Conclusion: Working in partnership to deliver this vision
104
Technical Annex: Our aspiration for every child
105
References
107
4
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Foreword
Childhood is changing and our education system must change with it. Children are
growing up in a world that is evolving faster, with increased connectivity but also
uncertainty, increased communication but growing mistrust. Our children's horizons are
wider, their ambitions greater and their determination to make the world a better place
even stronger.
At the same time pressures are arriving earlier, worries can feel bigger, and children are
struggling to articulate the instability many families face. The last government's vision for
education started and stopped at the school gates, from which the consequences have
been clear: rising school absence, families left to fight for support for their children,
disengagement rising, and families and communities not believing educational success is
for them. Today, too many children and families have withdrawn, no longer believing that
education is their route to a better life.
This government will build on the opportunities and respond to the challenges our
children face. I am proud of the speed at which this government has moved to fix the
foundations of our children's lives and services. We're rebuilding the services around
schools that support families, with the foundation of Best Start, new youth clubs and free
breakfast clubs. We are tackling child poverty with unprecedented ambition: expanding
eligibility to free school meals and bringing an end to the heinous injustice of the two child
limit.
In school, we have recruited and retained thousands more teachers across our secondary
and special schools. We have driven down persistent absence and invested in school
environments that are built to support children with SEND.
Now we look forwards: to take our education system into the 2030s and beyond.
This white paper is our plan to build a system which matches the ambition we have for
our children, a system which works for the children neglected for too long, which
stretches every child further, and sets them up to achieve and thrive.
Across the last thirty years, successive reforms have improved standards in our schools.
Generations of children have benefitted from literacy and numeracy hour, from the
phonics the last Labour Government brought in, and from the professionalisation and
spread of evidence-based teaching. We must build on that legacy and realise the
opportunities of childhood today, recognising our best schools are those where children
achieve academically and thrive as people: two reinforcing halves of the same coin.
First, our approach to education must shift from narrow to broad. Past governments'
narrow focus on what happens only within the school gates will be replaced with a broad
vision for childhood, from the day children are born to their transition to adulthood. Our
ambition for high-quality education therefore starts in the early years where the
foundations of future success are laid.
Schools' curricula must be rich and broad, building every child's knowledge and their
skills so our young people step into a world of change confident in their ability to shape it.
Enrichment will be not just for those who can afford to pay, but a common entitlement for
Foreword
5
all. We will support schools' roles as educators and anchors in our communities, because
we know that education doesn't begin and end with the school bell.
Next, we must take children let down under the last government from sidelined to
included.
Children with special educational needs and disabilities must be able to attend their local
mainstream school and have their needs met by highly trained teachers, leaders and
support staff, driving the highest standards for all.
We will not tolerate the blind eye that has been turned to the underperformance of white
working-class children, and we will back aspirational school leaders to work in low
income communities, supported by strengthened school trusts rooted in their
communities, learning from and developing each other. And children progressing well but
capable of even more will be stretched and challenged to soar.
As we deliver these changes, our test will be the third shift: children and families who
have withdrawn become engaged, believing in education once again. Children attending
school every day and participating actively once there. Parents backing schools and
taking an active role in supporting their children's learning at home, believing again that
their children's success in school is their work and achievement too.
The young people let down most by the system we inherited have the most to gain from
the uncompromising expectations I will bring. This white paper sets out a vision for
education for the next decade, for a generation of children who will live into the next
century.
The children in our classrooms today are the inventors, artists, creators, engineers,
scientists, partners and parents of tomorrow. They will shape our country's future - not
just our economy, but our society. As they emerge from our schools, we need not just
young people fit for the world of work, but engaged, responsible citizens ready to shape
our country as we head towards the twenty-second century. The road to national renewal
runs through our schools.
That, of course, is a shared responsibility. It needs parents, schools and government,
local authorities, healthcare, businesses, charities and communities to work together as
one. Together the pages of this white paper demand the collective creation of our
common future. And now it's up to all of us to answer the call.
Bridget Phillipea
The Rt Hon Bridget Phillipson MP
Secretary of State for Education
6
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Executive Summary
Our vision for childhood and for schools
The education and experiences that we provide to the children of today will shape
the society of tomorrow. Our children are the citizens of our common future - the start
of every success - and in them we see the curiosity, resilience and enterprise to succeed.
As new waves of technological change transform our society and economy as never
before, it is more important than ever that our nurseries, schools, trusts and colleges
prepare the next generation to shape our world together.
It all begins with family.¹ Children can achieve and thrive throughout their lives, with the
core memories of a happy and fulfilling childhood, and the support of a strong, stable,
loving home. This is the experience we want for every child and why this ambitious white
paper sits alongside our wider plan to rebuild our public services. This will support
children and families at each stage and in every sphere of their lives, so that schools are
not alone in working for the brighter future our young people deserve.
Our children have the strongest foundations when love and support at home is built
on with stretching, enriching and inclusive school experiences. Great schools deliver
this for every child. Teachers build children's knowledge and skills, encouraging debate
and discussion, which broadens young people's horizons and challenges their ideas.
They see children's strengths and where they need extra support, recognising high
standards and inclusion as two sides of the same coin. Staff put in place evidence-based
strategies that enable children to attend, achieve and thrive at their local school. They
deliver support and stretch for every child - from those currently struggling, to those
doing well but capable of even more.
Schools are incredible agents for change: a universal public service that can reach every
child and every family. Every school must be set up to match the ambition our children
have to face into the world of change, uncertainty and opportunity that lies beyond the
school gates.
Government must set the conditions which enable every family and every school to
support children's success: a partnership between all those with the responsibility to set
our children up so they can achieve their ambitions and aspirations.
This white paper is not simply a vision of the change we want to bring to our schools, but
a call to parents, schools, local services, and everyone working with children and young
people to join us in building a future where every child can achieve and thrive.
The challenge we face
The last three decades have seen real progress in education, led by dedicated school
leaders, teachers and support staff. We have built a new evidence base on what works to
improve teaching and learning, from innovative changes such as the implementation of
the Rose Review's findings on phonics, to establishing the evidence base on adaptive
teaching to improve classroom practice. But the celebration of such successes must not
lead us to the complacent belief that all is well.
Executive Summary
7
As childhood has changed and children face both new pressures and new opportunities,
education policy has struggled to keep up. Children in reception will go out into a world
that is completely reshaped by AI and technology. Young people have wider horizons than
ever before, with more agency to find and access information. Yet they have found school
does not always meet their horizons. We need to make sure they have strong
foundations of knowledge and that they are active participants in their learning -
debating, questioning, challenging and pursuing their own inquiry - set up for a lifetime of
learning, not passive recipients of information.
In this world of change, children and young people need to feel a sense of belonging.
Yet we have not prioritised this for our young people. Out of 27 European countries, the
UK is last in how happy 15-year-olds are with their life.² We want to give children their
childhood back. International studies such as PISA show us that high standards of
attainment and belonging can go together: countries like the Netherlands, Switzerland,
South Korea and Japan perform strongly in both. 3,4
We must be every bit as demanding for our children. Yet despite the best efforts of
dedicated staff, our school system is not serving all children well. Around one in five
children are missing a day of school every fortnight.⁵ The number of children saying they
belong at school has declined.⁶ Teacher and leader turnover is highest in schools with the
highest proportion of disadvantaged pupils, where children could most benefit from
stability. 7,8 Disadvantaged children - especially white working-class children - and
children with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) are not succeeding
as they should, with too many children not stretched to achieve all they can. Prior to
the pandemic, in 2019, the primary school attainment gap widened for the first time since
at least 2007, with researchers pointing to the failure to improve attainment for children
living in the most persistent disadvantage.⁹ Children's outcomes are still - too often and
too much - determined by background or circumstances, and this has led to a failure to
close attainment gaps.
8
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Figure 1: Pupil attainment by special educational needs (SEN) and disadvantaged status
Year 1
Percentage of pupils meeting expected standards in the phonics screening check
100%
83%
84%
85%
84%
83%
84%
84%
78%
80%
80%
73%
75%
72%
70%
70%
71%
66%
66%
68%
67%
62%
63%
62%
57%
No phonics
50%
45%
assessments
42%
43%
44%
43%
in 2019/20 and
44%
42%
43%
38%
37%
2020/21
38%
32%
24%
25%
0%
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Key stage 2
Percentage of pupils meeting expected standards in reading, writing and maths
100%
75%
70%
71%
66%
66%
67%
69%
67%
60%
No KS2
51%
51%
47%
assessments
50%
46%
47%
in 2019/20
43%
44%
39%
and 2020/21
25%
21%
22%
24%
18%
18%
20%
22%
14%
0%
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Key stage 4
Average Attainment 8 score
75.0
53.7*
54.7**
52.8
49.8
50.1
50.3
50.3
50.0
50.4
50.0
40.2*
40.3**
37.0
36.7
36.7
37.6*
35.0
34.6
34.9
25.0
30.7*
31.1**
27.2
27.6
29.4
27.1
28.1
27.8
28.2
Covid-19
impacting grading
0.0
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Pupils with SEN
Disadvantaged pupils
Pupils who are not known to be disadvantaged
Source: DfE phonics screening check attainment data, KS2 attainment data, KS4 attainment data
* Centre assessed grades
** Teacher assessed grades
***
GCSE exams returned in 2022 and grades were awarded at a midpoint between 2021 and pre-pandemic
grading
Executive Summary
9
Figure 2: Young people's perceptions of the school environment, 2014-2022
100%
82%
75%
67%
75%
58%
50%
56%
47%
25%
0%
2014
2018
2022
Feeling safe
School belonging
Source: Health Behaviour in School-aged Children (HBSC) England, 2023
Simply continuing the approach we have taken in the past will leave us with an
education system that fails too many. That failure is seen in children who move from
struggling at school, to not attending or attaining, and go on to become part of the nearly
one million young people not in education, employment or training (NEET). 10
High-quality teaching must be at the heart of our school system. We must double
down on evidence-based pedagogy on what works for all children and their learning. And
we need to go further, building the evidence on what works for children's engagement. It
is a challenge to us to engage families in the power of education, and to support strong
home learning environments alongside schools which excite a love of learning and
empower every child.
Too many children with SEND have been told they cannot thrive in mainstream schools,
and that learning alongside their friends and neighbours is not for them. The principle that
disabled people should be able to fully participate in our society if we remove the barriers
they face risks slipping away from our education system. More children are being
educated in specialist settings now than at any time in the last half century,¹¹ alongside
more moving into unregistered alternative provision or home education attributed to
unmet SEND needs. 12,13,14 For children, the level of support they receive is too often
determined by how hard their families fight, or how much their families can spend. 15 It is
clear that we must reset how we are equipping mainstream schools and the
services that should wrap around them to enable all children to achieve and thrive in
education, alongside securing high-quality specialist provision for children with complex
needs who need a tailored educational experience.
We know that if we build an education system that enables the success of our most
disadvantaged children, we will enable the success of all. The shifts set out in this white
paper are built on strong foundations, learning from innovative leaders and teachers who
10
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
have improved standards. This white paper shows that standards and inclusion
together, working hand-in-hand, are how we can transform opportunities and outcomes
to enable every child to achieve and thrive.
Our aspiration for every child
Transformative change for our country requires bold ambition for our children. Children
born under this government will not see their life chances dictated by their background.
When this generation finishes secondary school, it is our ambition that:
All children will be stretched to achieve higher standards. On average,
across the system as a whole, children will leave school achieving a grade 5 or
higher across their GCSEs. Every child will share in this improvement - from
targeted support to help those furthest behind secure a pass, to ensuring that
children who are progressing but capable of more are stretched to achieve the
very top grades.
The disadvantage gap will be halved. Children from low-income backgrounds
will achieve around a full grade higher in each of their GCSEs than is the case
today. This equates to over 1.3 million grade improvements across the cohort,
and over 30,000 more disadvantaged children passing English and maths at
grade 4 or above each year.
Ofqual is responsible for maintaining standards and public confidence. It will
continue to use a range of evidence to ensure that grades keep their value over
time. Where evidence, including from the National Reference Tests, indicates that
there is an increase in children's attainment, that evidence will be appropriately
reflected in the grading of qualifications. Any increase in grades must reflect genuine
increases in attainment. See technical annex on page 105 for more information on
these targets.
Already, more than 300 mainstream, comprehensive schools across the country are
meeting the Key Stage 4 attainment levels aligned with our national aspiration for
every child. In these schools, children achieve a grade 5 or above on average across
their GCSEs, with disadvantaged children achieving at the level needed to halve the
national disadvantage gap even as overall standards rise. These are schools serving a
broad range of communities, including schools with above-average levels of
disadvantage and higher proportions of children with an Education, Health and Care plan
(EHCP) or receiving special educational needs (SEN) support. These schools demonstrate
what is achievable across the system. Our ambition is not to set uniform or unrealistic
expectations, but to ensure that every child can leave school with the knowledge, skills
and qualifications they need to progress, thrive, and participate fully in society.
This aspiration will deliver the opportunities that prepare young people for adult life and
equip them for further study and employment. It will reinforce two of our targets in the
National Youth Strategy and Post-16 Education and Skills White Paper:
Halving the gap in participation in enriching activities between disadvantaged young
people and their peers by 2035.
Two thirds of young people participating in higher level learning by age 25.
Executive Summary
11
Change is underway - by the end of this Parliament, we will already see the impact:
Early years: A record proportion of children starting school ready to learn - 75% of
5-year-olds reaching a good level of development in the Early Years Foundation
Stage.¹⁶
Key Stage 1: 90% of children meeting the expected standard in the Year 1 Phonics
Screening Check.¹⁷
Key Stage 2: Outcomes will reach their highest level since current assessments
began. This means around 25,000 more children leaving primary school with strong
foundations for secondary, including over 10,000 disadvantaged children.
Key Stage 4: Stronger progress for disadvantaged children and those starting
secondary school below expected standards - a group that includes over three-
quarters of children identified with SEND at the end of Key Stage 2.¹⁸
Pupil belonging: More children - including those disadvantaged or with SEND - will
feel a strong sense of belonging in school. Progress will be monitored through robust,
ongoing national and international surveys. By 2029, we expect every school to
monitor children's sense of belonging and engagement, up from around 60% of
schools today.¹⁹
Across the system, this will be supported by key delivery commitments:
Teachers: 6,500 more expert teachers in secondary schools, special schools and FE
colleges, targeted where need is greatest.
Attendance: The attendance rate will rise by 1.3 percentage points compared to
2023/24, to over 94% - equivalent to children attending 20 million more days of school
each year from 2028/29. This would be the fastest improvement in a decade²⁰ and our
first step towards restoring attendance to pre-pandemic levels and beyond.
Inclusive mainstream alongside high-quality specialist provision: Schools
equipped and funded to support children with SEND to achieve and thrive in inclusive
mainstream settings, working together with high-quality specialist provision.
Curriculum and enrichment: Every child will benefit from a refreshed and broad
National Curriculum that secures knowledge and delivers key skills, alongside a wide
range of enriching opportunities within and beyond the curriculum, delivered through a
new enrichment entitlement.
How we will deliver change
We are already making significant progress to improve children's lives, at all ages, inside
and outside school - across education, social care, health and youth services. We want to
work alongside the profession to build on what is working, and bring searching
expectations for where we can go further, spreading innovation and supporting schools to
learn from one another.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
Chapter 1: Our children's futures. Across government, we are rebuilding public services
for our children, to support healthy, happy childhoods and enable every child to achieve
and thrive. Our plans will wrap services around children and schools. Our schools are a
truly universal public service which can touch the lives of every child and family. Services
12
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
must be designed to work together, recognising and strengthening the anchor role that
schools play in communities and working hand-in-hand with school staff to get support to
children and families. Isolated services do not transform outcomes; we will design new
collective accountability for our children within a community.
Chapter 2: Narrow to broad. We are learners from birth and our ambitions for education
must begin in the early years. By rebuilding family services, boosting quality in early years
settings and building new relationships between early years providers and schools, more
children will have a strong start. At school, all children should have a rich and broad
experience. That means a curriculum that builds knowledge and skills; securing the
highest standards in reading, writing, speaking and numeracy as the critical foundations
- helping children to expand their knowledge, think critically, problem-solve, and access
the rest of their school curriculum. That means enrichment opportunities for all children,
and strong transitions from early years, between schools and into further education, study
and work. We will take a narrow experience for too many children and make it rich and
broad by:
Delivering a curriculum that is knowledge-rich and broad, inclusive and
innovative - taking forward the recommendations of our independent Curriculum and
Assessment Review and building on them to ensure all children are supported and
stretched.
Improving the transitions through each phase of education - strengthening
partnerships between nurseries and schools, and developing excellence in Key
Stage 3.
Providing an enrichment entitlement for every child, to ensure broad opportunities
both within and beyond the curriculum.
Encouraging breadth through our accountability system, with improved Progress
8 recognising the full range of young people's achievements across subjects.
Ensuring that children's horizons are stretched and their opportunities
broadened at every stage, by building on the strength of careers programmes and
raising aspirations.
Chapter 3: Sidelined to included. Young people are ambitious for themselves and their
futures. It is too often adults who expect less of young people because of their
background, additional needs or the communities in which they are born. High standards
and inclusion are two sides of the same coin, with our best schools combining challenge
and care every day. This is particularly important for those whose needs are often
sidelined by the wider system - including white working-class children, children with
SEND, children with experience of the children's social care system, and those
progressing but capable of more.
We will move forward from a national debate about a system that marginalises children
with SEND to an inclusive education system that delivers high standards for all. We will
invest in equipping schools to become inclusive with new digital plans that record
additional needs, better training for teachers and quicker access to health professionals
such as speech and language therapists. At the same time, we will retain EHCPs for
children with the most complex needs, underpinned by new evidence-based Specialist
Provision Packages that set out the kind of support children and young people will
Executive Summary
13
receive. This will end the postcode lottery, ensuring children get evidence-based support
early and starting to restore families' confidence in the system. Our consultation SEND
Reform: Putting Children and Young People First is published alongside this white paper.
We will ensure that children who have been sidelined for too long by the system are
included by:
Targeting deprivation funding and improving progress measures to boost
outcomes for the most disadvantaged children, by increasing the impact of the
pupil premium and National Funding Formula, and consulting on a new measure to
better reflect progress of children starting secondary school behind their peers.
Launching two place-focused missions - Mission North East and Mission Coastal
- to transform outcomes for children and young people locally and provide a blueprint
for national change. We will test a new model of bringing together schools with similar
needs, and local community leaders to innovate together and tackle entrenched
challenges in these areas.
Delivering inclusive mainstream education, backed by an Inclusive Mainstream
Fund of £1.6 billion over three years to ensure needs are identified early and met
consistently, alongside a statutory duty on nurseries, schools and colleges to record
and monitor special educational needs and provision in an Individual Support Plan
(ISP).
Expanding access to multiagency support in mainstream creating a new
£1.8 billion Experts at Hand service of speech and language therapists, Educational
Psychologists and wider professionals to get support to children early, alongside new
partnerships between special schools, alternative provision and mainstream settings
to meet a wide range of needs confidently.
Introducing new Specialist Provision Packages to set out nationally defined,
evidence-based support for children with the most complex needs, forming the basis
for future EHCPs, and ensuring families receive clearer, more consistent entitlements.
Investing £3.7 billion from now until 2030 to make buildings accessible, create
new special school places, and tens of thousands of new places in inclusion
bases in mainstream settings. This investment will also deliver high standard special
and alternative provision places for children with complex needs.
Chapter 4: Withdrawn to engaging. Our best schools know that children achieve most
when they feel safe and connected to their school environment; they show that high
expectations for academic excellence and deep pupil engagement go hand in hand. They
build relationships with parents and communities, working with health and local
government services, to deliver calm, safe classrooms - with consistently high standards
for behaviour and attendance, which minimise lost learning. We will move from children
and communities withdrawing from school to engaging by:
Establishing a new pupil engagement framework, developed with input from
children, parents and schools.
Establishing minimum expectations for home-to-school partnerships, with clear
communication expectations, tools for parents to support learning at home, and an
improved complaints process.
14
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Supporting schools and wider services so that children attend 20 million more
days per year by 2028/29 VS 2023/24 - the fastest rate of improvement in a decade.
Equipping schools with the tools and guidance they need to improve behaviour,
utilising our new attendance and behaviour hubs to spread best practice and
strengthening requirements for parents to engage with their child's school.
Introducing school profiles to give parents a rounded picture of their child's
education, presenting the latest useful information about schools together in one
place.
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
To achieve these shifts and deliver our vision for children, we will build stronger
foundations. Across the more than 22,000 state schools in England, excellent practice
that meets and delivers against these three shifts exists, as does the desire to innovate
and learn how we can do better.
However, parents and schools too often report that such excellence is the result of an
individual teacher or staff member going above and beyond in spite of the system, not
because of it. Excellent individual practice can transform the outcomes of individual
children. But it takes an excellent system - working with these teachers, leaders and
support staff and empowering them - to transform the outcomes of communities and
generations of children.
We are clear that a high performing education system builds on and spreads good
practice, invites innovation and embeds learning at every level. To drive forward these
changes, we will align incentives with these ambitions. This means schools will be
rewarded for supporting the progress of students who face the highest barriers to
learning, and we will act swiftly where schools are struggling. We will back asks with
investment - directly funding schools for inclusion, and supporting schools with training,
productivity and digital innovation - and will put resources where need is highest.
We will equip staff across education with the knowledge and skills needed to deliver
excellence. We will require collaboration between schools and wider public services to
work together for children's outcomes whilst ensuring the freedom for this to be driven
locally. We will create space for genuine innovation in a self-improving system with the
ability to test, learn and grow.
Chapter 5: Support and investment in high-quality staff. We will work in partnership
with school staff - building on work already underway, such as the new School Support
Staff Negotiating Body that recognises the invaluable role of support staff - by:
Delivering 6,500 more expert teachers across our schools and colleges - with a
clear delivery plan to achieve that.
Funding schools to improve maternity pay for school teachers and leaders,
doubling the period of full pay to 8 weeks, and seeking similar improvements for
support staff and college staff.
Giving teachers the training they need through a new and improved Teacher
Training Entitlement, to ensure that every teacher and leader can access high-quality
professional development, alongside more than £200m over three years for our SEND
CPD programme.
Executive Summary
15
Supporting Excellence in Leadership, including through a new mentoring and
coaching offer for headteachers, and piloting a new place-based Headteacher
Retention Incentive.
Working in partnership with the profession, including through the Improving
Education Together agreement with unions and employers, so that policy works in
practice.
Chapter 6: Collaboration between schools and with other partners. The school
system must be rooted in partnership and collaboration, so it can achieve higher
standards, strengthen professional practice, and deliver better outcomes for children. We
will support schools to be anchors in their communities, collaborating with each other and
across public services, by:
Putting collaboration at the heart of the system by moving to all schools being
part of school trusts, including new trusts established by Local Authorities or Area
Partnerships, which are rooted in their community and equipped to innovate for all
children.
Ensuring proportionate, independent inspection of trust quality and targeted
intervention where it is needed.
Setting out clear roles and responsibilities for local government in relation to all
local schools and other partners, such as health, to deliver for children across the
community.
Chapter 7: Enabling innovation and ambition. We will drive innovation and ambition
through system-led improvement by:
Rolling out our new Regional Improvement for Standards and Excellence (RISE)
universal and continuing targeted support programmes, so that all schools are
encouraged to share and learn from best practice and, where needed, receive the
appropriate support to drive high standards for all children.
Realising the opportunities from data, AI and technology with safe tools that
boost teaching and learning, underpinned by an extensive evidence programme and
linked closely to curriculum delivery.
Building a stronger, more nuanced accountability system that provides parents
with a clear picture of schools and gives schools and trusts the insight they need to
improve.
We will also work with the sector to implement our reforms in a sequenced, phased
and manageable way. The ask of the sector here is rightly ambitious for children. We will
work with the sector to support effective delivery through:
Significant investment in the core schools budget and children and family services,
including to support mainstream inclusion.
Supporting schools with change, including working with the sector to assess what
minimum lead-in time is reasonable for schools to prepare for different kinds of
changes, creating a single, easy-to-use home for all school guidance and ensuring
that all guidance is shorter, clearer, and easier to use.
16
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Carefully sequencing and phasing major reforms. Implementation will come in
three phases that overlap: aligning to best practice from academic year 2025/26,
preparing for SEND and curriculum reforms from 2026/27, and full implementation
from 2028/29.
We have a generational opportunity to deliver a school system which provides high
standards and inclusion for every child, regardless of their background or need. Realising
this vision will require all of us to work together in partnership to improve outcomes for
all children.
Through this white paper, we set out the steps we will take to harness and spread existing
best practice, as well as empowering everyone across the system to innovate together to
improve outcomes. This is our open invitation: we want government, schools,
families, and everyone with a stake in our children's future working in genuine
partnership - both at national level and in every community around the country. Together,
with collaboration and determination, we can enable every child to achieve and thrive.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
17
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
Chapter 1: Our children's futures
Vision
Our vision is for all children to enjoy a childhood rich in opportunity - to learn, play
and develop as individuals and to become empowered, confident citizens ready to shape
our society's future.
Delivering that ambition centres on schools as an anchor in children's lives yet
stretches far beyond the school gates. It is an ambition that begins with family, and the
strong, stable and loving environments that help set our children up for life. It is an
ambition that builds on working in partnership with our health service - ensuring that
children and families can access services, from maternity and health visiting onward, that
enable our children to thrive. It is an ambition that reaches into youth clubs, into sports
teams, community groups which shape how children learn to work together in teams, to
communicate and respect one another.
Schools are the universal public service in children's lives, but our school staff cannot
deliver for children alone. To enable children to achieve in school, government must
rebuild public services across our communities - education, local government, health
and safeguarding partners - to actively support the healthy, happy childhoods that every
parent wants for their child. We must equip these services to be adaptable and
responsive to the changing patterns of children's lives providing stability, love and
support.
Above all, this is a national mission to celebrate and protect childhood, so that
children can seize opportunities to achieve and thrive, grow with confidence and shape
their own futures as well as the future of our society.
Case for change
Childhood is changing. Children and young people show great resourcefulness, curiosity
and creativity as they navigate a world that is faster, louder and more complex than the
one many adults experienced. They see opportunities and have broad ambitions for their
futures in this changing world. Yet at the same time, the patterns and routines which
shape young people's lives are transforming more rapidly than the services designed to
support them. Families are the anchors of children's lives, the circle of love and support
that guides young people through the ups and downs of life. But some families are
struggling. Parents are searching for support, but too often services have been stripped
away.
This is having a profound impact on our children. One in four children are arriving at
school not fully toilet trained. 21 Higher screen use for young children has been linked to
poorer language development.²² Parents know they have responsibilities, but too often
do not know where to look for support. Council spending on early intervention services,
including children's centres and family support, fell by 42% between 2010/11 and
18
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
2023/24, with the most deprived areas hit hardest.²³ One in four families with children
under five say that they have been unable to access local children's centres or family
hubs, rising to one in three amongst those on low incomes.²⁴
As children grow up there are fewer places in our communities for them to go and
to spend time with friends. Between 2010 and 2023, more than 1,000 youth centres
closed. 25 Young people associate a lack of opportunities in their communities and spaces
to socialise with increasing online interactions. 26 More than a third of secondary school
pupils say they do not participate in any enrichment activities in school, and a similar
proportion say they do not participate in any activities outside school.²⁷
In a typical classroom of thirty children, there are around ten growing up in
poverty. 28 This permeates all aspects of children's lives and education. Children on low
incomes struggle to participate in all aspects of school life and report missing school
because they do not have the right kit or are not able to pay to take part in activities. 29
Just one in four children in families with the lowest incomes get five good GCSEs
including English and maths. For children in the families with the highest incomes, the
figure is nearly three in four.³⁰
Challenges overlap and are often exacerbated for Children in Need, children looked
after by local authorities, children on a child protection plan, and children facing
multiple disadvantages compared with their peers - affecting not only their educational
outcomes but also their physical and mental health, and their experience of
childhood. 31,32,33 Young carers, providing essential care and support to their loved ones,
often step up at the expense of their own childhood development and wellbeing. 34 We
need to ensure there is early, consistent and coordinated support for them to thrive.
Amid this uncertainty, schools are a place of stability. They are a universal public service
with an open door to every child and every family. Schools are an anchor, but they
cannot be the only service accessible to families. Across communities, we need a
network of services wrapping around schools, families and our children, so that every
parent knows help is on hand, and all children can be supported to grow into the
confident, capable citizens that will shape our country's future.
This is a collective responsibility that requires collective accountability. Childhoods built
on love and stability are those which enable learning and educational success. 35 This
chapter outlines action taken across government to rebuild services, so that they can
provide joined up and timely support for children and families.
Wrapping services around children and families
Across the last year and a half, our first priority has been to fix the foundations of our
public services across family support and education systems. Our ambition to rebuild
services for children and families comes in two parts: first, to make services available
and accessible to families and, second, to join up those services so that information can
be shared between them to give children and young people consistent support that fits
around their needs.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
19
This requires coherent planning of services across a community and an
understanding of the patterns of children and families lives in order to design
around them. As a government, we are in the foothills of this challenge, but we are
beginning to rebuild both the service infrastructure, and the systems of funding,
commissioning and accountability that will enable this.
This will require schools, trusts, local authorities, and health services to work
together in ways that have become unfamiliar over the last decade. It will also look
different in different parts of the country, reflecting not only the lives of families - but also
patterns of devolution and the maturity of strategic as well as local authorities.
Rebuilding local services
The building blocks of success are laid in the early years of a child's life, as they begin
to communicate, build relationships, play, and learn. In these early years, parents need
access to health, family support and education services working hand-in-hand. Our
strategy, Giving Every Child the Best Start in Life', sets out the building blocks of a new
approach to supporting children and families from their first days of life. Best Start
Family Hubs and the Healthy Babies programme, jointly funded by education and
health, will revitalise and build on the very best of Sure Start Children's Centres. Hubs will
provide a single point of access to healthcare services like breastfeeding support or
childhood vaccinations, alongside advice for parents on how to support learning at home,
and stay and play services so children can start to interact with one another and parents
can build local community networks.
We will go further by ensuring every Best Start Family Hub has a dedicated SEND
practitioner, backed by over £200 million investment over three years.
Trained SEND practitioners will help parents understand their child's development, identify
emerging needs sooner, and support vital join-up between early years settings, health
visitors and SEND teams. We know this works: evaluations of previous Sure Start family
services found "overwhelmingly positive" impacts on outcomes such as educational
attainment at school and reduced hospitalisations, and that children with access to Sure
Start Children's Centres were more likely to have their needs recognised at age 5 and less
likely to require SEND support between ages 7 and 16.³⁶ Best Start Hubs will work with
Neighbourhood Health Services, set out in the NHS 10 Year Health Plan, to deliver this
shift to prevention making community healthcare more available and accessible.
This integration will flow through to nurseries and childminders providing early education
and care services.
We will provide additional funding from our new Inclusive Early Years Fund to
early years providers to identify and respond where children have emerging
additional needs.
This will ensure that childcare is more available and accessible for children with SEND,
preventing the current scenario where too often settings say that they are not equipped to
meet children's needs. This will support early intervention and opportunities for children to
learn to socialise and develop. We will also work with local authorities to strengthen their
sufficiency planning for children with SEND, giving parents greater confidence that their
children can access the early education and childcare they are entitled to. (More detail is
set out in SEND Reform: Putting Children and Young People First).
20
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Local authorities have a critical role to play in working with their local early years and
childcare providers to shape a market which meets local sufficiency requirements and
delivers high-quality education and care.
Through our Childcare and Early Education Review, we will look at how to improve
access to early education and care, making the system simpler for families and
delivering a coherent local offer.
This comes alongside our expansion of school-based nurseries, making high-quality
childcare available and accessible, and the expansion to 30 hours of government funded
childcare saving working families an estimated £7,500 a year.
Best Start Family Hubs will also be critical for integrating early family help services. We
are expanding the Families First Partnership programme which prioritises early
intervention where families are experiencing challenges, breaking the cycle of late
intervention to help keep families together wherever possible and safe to do so. We are
transforming children's social care with more than £2 billion of new investment since
November 2024.
This does not stop when children reach school. Schools sit at the heart of children's lives
and school staff are often the first to see changes in children's behaviour or wellbeing.
Families First Partnerships will support school attendance - a key early indicator of
need³⁷ - recognising that when children's home lives are in turmoil, attendance at school
can drop and severe absence becomes all too common. Children's mental health is also a
significant barrier to school attendance. 38 By coordinating services across schools and
the NHS, we're expanding Mental Health Support Teams - from 60% of schools today,
to every school and college by the end of this Parliament.
We are further integrating our schools into child safeguarding with education as the fourth
safeguarding partner in new multiagency teams. These teams will bring together the
knowledge each service holds about a family to keep children safe and enable them to
thrive.
We have been tackling children's vulnerability to violence by partnering schools within a
local authority area together with local education, safeguarding and police professionals
as part of the SAFE (Support, Attend, Fulfil, Exceed) Taskforces programme being piloted
in 10 serious violence hotspots. The lessons learnt will inform cross-government
commitments on partnerships and school-based support in communities most affected
by violence, including knife crime.
When children arrive at school, they must be ready to learn. Our Child Poverty Strategy
will lift over half a million children out of poverty in the final year of this Parliament³⁹ by
boosting family incomes, driving down essential costs and strengthening local services.
We are removing the two child limit and supporting parents to work though tackling
barriers to childcare access under Universal Credit and introducing free breakfast clubs in
every primary school. Providing a supportive start to the school day for all primary school
children, no matter their circumstances, helps improve behaviour, attendance and
attainment. 40
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
21
Case study: Delivering free breakfast clubs for all children
At Devonshire Road Primary School, the free breakfast club is delivered by a variety
of existing school staff including administrators, support staff, teaching assistants,
and a learning mentor. The SENCO is also available on site to support when
required. The school supports children with SEND by providing high-quality staff
training and making appropriate adaptations for individual children where needed.
The school have also ensured that the hall where the free club is delivered includes
quiet spaces and regulation zones to support children.
A variety of activities are available to children during the free breakfast club
including an activity zone for games, a creative zone for colouring and sticker art, a
physical activity zone for table football as well as food activities available 3 times a
week. The school reports a noticeable improvement on punctuality for the children
attending the club, along with a positive impact on children's readiness to start the
day and attitude to learning.
Further case studies on school breakfast clubs are available at Free breakfast clubs:
school case studies - GOV.UK.
Beyond the school gates, we need spaces for children and young people to spend
time with friends. Local authorities are receiving crucial investment for children's play
areas alongside funding flowing through Youth Matters, the first national youth strategy
in over 20 years, to create spaces for children and young people growing up in their
communities. In addition, over £400 million will be spent on new and upgraded grassroots
community sport facilities across the UK, which promote health and wellbeing. This
funding will have a particular focus on providing access to sport for under-represented
groups, such as women and girls, young people with SEND, and those living in
disadvantaged areas. New pathfinders - announced in the Education Estates Strategy -
will pilot how surplus spaces in the education estate can be used flexibly to meet wider
community needs, including youth facilities.
Local accountability for every child
Nurseries, schools and colleges are at the heart of children's lives but need each of these
other services, from social care, mental health and youth services to be working in
tandem to deliver the best outcomes for all children across a community. That requires
clear strategic planning and a stronger role for local authorities working with schools,
healthcare and voluntary services.
It is only through collaboration between all the local services that touch on a child's life
that we can expect to deliver the improvements we want to see. However, for too long,
partnership has been seen as optional rather than essential. While there are excellent
models of joint working, driven by strong local leadership, there are no clear and well-
defined expectations for how local authorities, schools and other services should work
together, or the role each part of the system plays. Nor is there a consistent set of
outcomes focused on the child as a whole, that could galvanise and unite local partners
in delivery.
22
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
As we rebuild our public services, we must move from services operating in isolation,
each with their own performance indicators and funding priorities, to services for children
and families working together across a local system, jointly responsible for outcomes.
We will create a new model of local partnership and shared accountability for
children's outcomes across local communities.
Our aim is to enable the conditions that allow a sense of collective endeavour and
responsibility: binding local government, schools and trusts, Integrated Care Boards,
police, and other local stakeholders around the aim of delivering shared outcomes for
children and young people.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
23
Chapter 2: Narrow to broad
Vision
Building on these firm foundations in our communities, our schools provide children
with a rich and broad education that supports educational success, ignites curiosity
and lays the foundations for a rich and fulfilling life and career. We want every school to
join the best schools in being places that raise aspirations and standards for every child
and young person - without exception. This means every school nurturing children's
talents and growing a love of learning that will carry them through school and set them up
to seize the opportunities of the future. We want to prepare children to be skilled
employees, but also citizens, artists, scientists, teachers, campaigners and parents.
To prepare children for the 2030s and beyond, each school's curriculum must be rich in
knowledge, broad in scope, inclusive and innovative. This begins with strong foundations
through a broad early years curriculum. Excellence in maths and science will provide
the problem-solvers of tomorrow. A love of reading and the deep knowledge that it
unlocks will help children navigate an uncertain world, where fiction is too often dressed
up as fact. A mastery of listening, speaking and writing will help them express their
thoughts, present their ideas, and find their voice. Our schools will teach young people to
think critically and to draw on their store of knowledge to question the information now
readily at their fingertips.
Enrichment, which has for too long been the privilege of a few, must now become part of
a common entitlement. A strong enrichment offer and revitalised arts curriculum will
spark children's creativity. Access to sports, culture and nature will expand their
horizons. Civic engagement will stretch their abilities beyond the classroom. Those who
have been trapped in a cycle of poor outcomes and disengagement - often white
working-class children, children with SEND, the children who are progressing but capable
of more - have the most to gain from an ambitious, future-focused curriculum.
Case for change
All children need strong foundations in English and maths - both for their own sakes
and because they are essential for accessing the rest of their school curriculum. Reading
expands young people's imagination and exposes them to new ideas and challenging
perspectives; oral language interventions lead to significant improvements in student
outcomes. 41 Children with a strong foundation in maths are more likely to achieve across
the curriculum. 42,43 Raising standards in oracy, reading, writing and maths is fundamental
to supporting our cross-government mission on growth.
While many children are attaining well in these subjects, far too many children leave
primary school without reaching expected standards in these fundamental areas. At
least a quarter of children did not meet the expected standard in reading in each of the
last ten years, 44 and at least a fifth did not achieve the expected standard in maths over
the same period. 45 Children with SEND, 46 disadvantaged children⁴⁷ and children from
white working-class backgrounds⁴⁸ are all less likely to meet these critical standards at
the end of primary.
At secondary, the Curriculum and Assessment Review found that EBacc measures were
unnecessarily constraining subject choice for some students and, consequently, were
affecting students' engagement and achievement. It is essential that all children retain a
24
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
strong academic core, but we believe the current structure has hampered progress in
subjects that strengthen our economy and society, including the arts subjects. We need
to ensure breadth is recognised in our accountability system with an improved
Progress 8 model.
There is also wide variation in access to enrichment opportunities that expand horizons,
raise aspirations, and engage children: both in and outside school. Studies have shown
that extracurricular enrichment participation is associated with higher educational
achievement. 49,50,51 But more than a third of secondary school pupils say they do not
participate in any enrichment activities in school, and a similar proportion say they do not
participate in any activities outside school, 52 with lower participation for children whose
parents did not attend university, 53 children in need, 54 and those eligible for free school
meals. 55,56 In addition, children with SEND are less likely to be involved in extracurricular
sports and physical activities. 57,58
Starting the school journey right
Children's early years are the critical foundation to lifelong learning. For far too long,
the early years have been regarded as lower in status - treated as an optional add-on
rather than an integral part of the education system. We will tackle this narrow conception
of children's learning and educational experience. As set out in 'Giving every child the
best start in life' and in the previous chapter, we will rebuild early family services so
parents are supported with children's early development, especially communication,
through our new Best Start Family Hubs.
Our changes will ensure that more children are arriving into reception and transitioning
into Key Stage 1 with strong foundations. A child starting school is an exciting but
unknown step for families, especially for families of children with additional needs. We
want to strengthen the relationship between early years settings and schools to support
transitions.
We will fund partnerships between early years settings and schools, using this
model to test and implement different approaches to transitions, including for children
with SEND.
These partnerships will allow staff in schools and early years settings to spend time
learning from each other and sharing knowledge, expertise and best practice - so
that staff can confidently meet the needs of all children. This will include developing
shared resources and systems to help with early identification of needs and support, as
well as shared pedagogy and curriculum, to ensure consistency of learning approaches.
They will also help parents and children build relationships with schools, so that children
feel at home in the classroom when they transition to school.
We will publish and share best practice for schools, from schools that
effectively support children into reception.
This will showcase effective practice from primary schools across the country, including
how schools use home visits. This will complement a wide range of other initiatives to
boost quality in the reception year, including the creation of new Reception Networks,
new training for reception classroom teachers, and continued funding for the Nuffield
Early Language Intervention (NELI) programme in reception.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
25
Our ambition is for every child in reception to feel supported, confident, and ready to start
school. We will measure our progress through a record 75% of children reaching a
good level of development at the end of reception by 2028. We have already delivered
training on reception year quality and created a new 'Compare your Good Level of
Development (GLD) data' report available to schools, trusts and local authorities. We also
want schools to achieve more for children from the start of primary. We have set an
ambition for 90% of children to meet the expected standard in the Phonics
Screening Check by the end of Year 1.
Our RISE universal offer of support will help support these ambitions - - driving
collaboration and sharing of best practice between schools - as part of a self-improving
system (see Chapter 7: Enabling innovation and ambition).
We will be launching new RISE Reception Networks to spread best practice and
encourage strong partnership working between schools.
Case study: Strengthening transitions into reception for children
with SEND
Over the last few years, leaders at Front Lawn Primary Academy have focused on
building trust with families and joint working with early years settings to support
transitions into reception. The SENCO and EYFS lead visit all feeder early years
settings to observe children and collect detailed information on communication,
sensory needs, toileting, sleep routines, and regulation strategies. Feeder nurseries
receive book bags and school jumpers for role-play areas, helping children with
communication or sensory challenges become familiar with routines and school
identity.
Transition events are informal, enabling families to meet the SENCO, school nurse,
pastoral team, and teaching staff on a one-to-one basis. Events such as Teddy
Bears' Picnics provide low-pressure opportunities for children to explore the
environment. Reception staff conduct structured home visits to understand each
child's context, build trust with families, and agree on early SEND support plans
where applicable.
This approach ensures early support before a child's entry into reception, helping
the school identify children's needs promptly. By addressing emerging issues early,
children's development is supported, and potential concerns can be effectively
managed without the need for escalation. Families report feeling informed and
supported.
26
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
A rich and broad, inclusive and innovative curriculum
All children should experience a curriculum that is knowledge-rich, broad, inclusive
and innovative. The national curriculum should raise the floor for all without adding any
limit to ambition or achievement. That is why, in July 2024, the Secretary of State
commissioned Professor Becky Francis CBE to undertake a holistic and expert-led review
of the curriculum, assessment and qualification system.
The Review reflected the evidence that a curriculum that is rich in knowledge and skills⁵⁹
can promote equality by giving everyone access to the same cultural references and give
all children what they need to engage with the changing world around them. It reflects the
cognitive science which shows that higher order thinking skills cannot be built without the
powerful knowledge that is their raw material.
Government responded to the report in November 2025 and confirmed how we intend to
take forward the reforms to create a world-leading curriculum that raises standards
and aspirations for all children. We also committed to develop evidence-led resources
to support curriculum adaptation for all children and young people, including those
with SEND.
To set children up for the changing world, they need access to a world-class curriculum,
world-class teaching and ensure that they are active participants in their learning. This
includes the effective use of evidence on metacognition to help children take
responsibility and secure agency over their learning. Metacognition enables learners to
transfer knowledge across subjects and develop the capacity to become independent,
self-improving lifelong learners.
Our response to the Curriculum and Assessment Review also included our measures to
support children to adapt to this fast-changing world, where information is so readily
available to them. We want every child to leave school able to critically engage with and
challenge the information they encounter throughout their work and life.
Arming young people with secure and well-founded knowledge is central to media
literacy, and making citizenship compulsory in primary schools will introduce key content
to children earlier, such as law and rights. Cognitive skills to critically analyse, challenge
claims and assess sources and methods are an important part of subjects like history,
English and science, and we will strengthen these skills. In English we will ensure children
study a wide range of texts, including transient texts, so that they can understand how
arguments are constructed through different types of media and the various ways in
which language can be used to persuade.
This is against the backdrop of wider changes in how advanced technologies are being
used across the sector, as part of the wider toolkit that all teachers can use to support
teaching and learning. It is vital that children are supported to become digitally
literate and to be confident users of technology. This should be done safely and in
ways that support, rather than replace their own cognitive effort. See Chapter 7: Enabling
innovation and ambition for more information.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
27
The Curriculum and Assessment Review
We have responded to the Curriculum and Assessment Review, committing to take
forward its recommendations, including:
Refreshing the programmes of study in line with the Review's recommendations
for first teaching from 2028. We will also update GCSEs for first teaching from
2029 onwards. In doing so we will follow the curriculum principles of
knowledge-rich, coherence, subject mastery, specificity and depth - making
sure that programmes of study and subject content are grounded in relevant
and important knowledge and disciplinary skills.
Creating a fully digital and easily navigable version of the national curriculum.
Developing evidence-led resources to support teachers in adapting the
curriculum for all children and young people, including those with SEND.
Preparing children and young people for life and careers in a changing world
through embedding oracy, financial, digital and media literacy in the curriculum
and improving climate and sustainability education.
Improving the assessment of writing at Key Stage 2 with greater focus on fluent
writing and introducing a new statutory national assessment of reading fluency
and comprehension in Year 8.
Consulting on Progress 8 options to ensure that pupils can access a strong
academic core and a breadth of subjects at Key Stage 4.
Excellence in literacy and numeracy
Phonics and reading
The ability to read well is the key that unlocks every subject, allowing children to
access the whole school curriculum. It broadens children's imaginations, exposes them to
new ideas and challenging perspectives, and fosters creativity. That is why we have made
2026 our National Year of Reading.
We are already raising standards in reading by embedding the changes set out in our
response to the Curriculum and Assessment Review. And we are going further, doubling
the reach of our Reading Ambition for All continuous professional development (CPD)
programme and training more teachers to support children's reading fluency. We have
announced a new statutory reading test for Year 8.
In addition to these commitments, our new 'Unlocking Reading' CPD for secondary
schools launched in January 2026. This will equip schools with assessment tools and
evidence-based strategies to support children through both mainstream teaching and
targeted interventions. At least 75% of secondary literacy leads will have access to this
new reading training by the end of the 2025/2026 academic year. This will ensure all
children can develop a lifelong love of reading.
28
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
RISE teams also play an important role in mobilising and spreading best practice both
regionally and locally. RISE teams are already working in partnership with English hubs,
supporting schools to engage in hub support and designing support plans for these
schools.
We will go further by deepening the partnership between English hubs and RISE
as a core part of our Universal RISE offer to schools. This will increase the visibility
of RISE English Hubs and use existing hub programmes to provide high-quality
support for schools that need it most.
Case study: A strong culture of reading
Learning to read and reading to learn is the golden thread at Beech Grove Primary
School, where they seek to create lifelong readers using a whole school approach
that focuses on fluency, confidence, and reading for pleasure.
At the foundation stage and KS1, children learn phonics in ability groups and
progress is monitored so that children move between groups as skills develop. The
school provides targeted interventions to support children who are struggling and
uses tailored tutoring sessions to practice specific sounds and key skills. At KS2,
children have different opportunities to develop their reading skills through whole
class reading, small group reading and daily story time. The school uses a broad
range of stories to motivate and inspire children to practice their reading skills.
Beech Grove has created a staff leadership role to promote reading for pleasure,
supporting teachers to attend and lead Teacher Research Groups. Staff across the
school have a comprehensive knowledge of children's authors, using this to engage
children with books pitched to their ability and interests.
At Beech Grove Primary School, where nearly three quarters of children have been
eligible for free school meals in the past 6 years, 81% of children meet the expected
standard in reading, writing and maths, above the national average of 62%.
Disadvantaged children also perform well, with 76% meeting the expected standard
compared to 47% nationally.
Speaking, Listening and Writing
We want speaking to be recognised as a core foundation of education, alongside
reading, writing and numeracy. Strong speaking skills are essential for building
children's communication, helping them develop fluency and the confidence to negotiate,
debate and discuss ideas. These abilities are critical not only for their future careers, but
also for their mental health and their capacity to build meaningful connections with others.
Building on the Early Years Foundation Stage (EYFS) statutory framework on
communication and language, we committed to specifying more on speaking and
listening throughout the National Curriculum key stages. We also committed to create
a new oracy framework to support primary teachers to help their children become
confident, fluent speakers by the end of Key Stage 2. Through the development of the
oracy framework, we will provide teachers with evidence-based guidance on how to
formatively assess and support children's oracy.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
29
Good writing is essential, not just for allowing children to express themselves, but for
scaffolding and supporting complex thought. We will continue to support schools in
implementing our recently published writing framework. It marks the beginning of our
longer-term plan to help teachers to support all children to become confident and fluent
writers who can share their ideas and find their voice in the classroom and beyond. We
have also set out our expectations for all schools to assess pupil progress in writing in
Year 8 and will signpost them to a range of high-quality products to help them do SO. At
secondary, we will publish a combined secondary oracy, reading and writing
framework, to support teachers to connect and use all three in their teaching, and to
embed literacy and oracy across the curriculum.
Case study: Embedding oracy within the classroom
Woodhall Primary School in Suffolk has established a whole-school approach to
teaching oracy within school. Oracy is fundamental to all teaching and learning at
the school. This approach provides children with opportunity to develop their
communication skills.
Oracy is woven into the curriculum at Woodhall Primary School. The school uses
different techniques, including sentence stems, talk tactics, collaborative problem
solving and debates. Oracy is treated as a key skill, on the same level as literacy
and numeracy.
The school provides children with different opportunities to develop their oracy
skills. This includes children becoming oracy ambassadors, taking part in listening
walks to evaluate each other's oracy skills and Talk Tuesday, where sessions are
structured to enable children to explore oracy in practice. The school also supports
its staff through high-quality training and resources that can be utilised within the
classroom.
Children at the school perform above the national average for reading, writing and
maths, with 78% of children meeting the expected standard, including 67% of
disadvantaged children.
Maths
We will embed changes recommended through the Curriculum and Assessment Review,
including resequencing the curriculum to deepen understanding for all children and
promoting maths assessment in year 8. In addition, our RISE teams are working in
partnership with Maths hubs by designing plans for schools which make the best use of
hub support.
We will go further by deepening the partnership between Maths Hubs and RISE
as a core part of our universal RISE offer. This will increase the visibility of RISE
Maths Hubs and use existing hub teacher development programmes to provide high-
quality support for schools that need it most. We will strengthen and extend RISE
Maths Hubs Programmes in Reception, boosting early numeracy.
30
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Building on its aims to increase participation and improve teaching of level 3 maths, we
have reformed the Advanced Maths Support Programme through the introduction of
new programmes to stretch, inspire and support more children to achieve in maths. This
includes our new Higher Level Maths Achievement Programme. A new pilot programme is
also supporting teachers and children to understand the value and role of maths and
statistics in machine learning and AI.
Case study: Excellence in teaching maths
Plashet, City of London Academy, a girls' school in East Ham, serves a highly
diverse community, with nearly half eligible for free school meals in the last 6 years.
Supported by London North East Maths Hub, their maths department has built a
shared approach that strengthens understanding, confidence and enjoyment of
maths across the school. Their improvement plan centres on teaching for mastery,
with weekly meetings focused on representations, questioning, and sequencing,
allowing teachers to reflect and refine practice to ensure a coherent journey from
Year 7 to GCSE.
As almost three quarters of students learn English as an additional language, the
school has a strong focus on oracy and the use of precise mathematical language,
so children can learn through discussion. The school reports that children now think
more deeply and can explain their reasoning, and more girls are choosing STEM
subjects post-16. The school's Attainment 8 score of 56.4 is higher than the national
average of 46.0, and its maths A8 score of 10.5 is above the national average of 9.1.
The maths department recently won the PTI Bernice McCabe award for 2025 to
2026 for excellence in leadership and teaching.
16 to 19 English and maths
It is crucial for learners to achieve the best possible levels of attainment in English and
maths to enable them to broaden their horizons. The biggest barrier to learners
progressing to Level 3 is their prior attainment at Key Stage 4, particularly in English
and maths. 60 This means that young people who do not achieve at least a grade 4 in
these crucial qualifications are more likely to be limited to a narrow future path, which
disproportionately includes young people with SEND⁶¹ and disadvantaged children. 62
As set out in the Post-16 Education and Skills White Paper, we are introducing new
Level 1 'preparation for GCSE' qualifications in English and maths for 16 to 19 year-old
students who have a grade 2 or lower in those subjects. These new qualifications will help
students gain the essential knowledge and skills in English and maths that will prepare
them to successfully resit their GCSEs the following year.
From September 2025, 16 to 19 funded students are offered 100 hours each of English
and/or maths teaching, to be delivered at any point in the academic year. Students
without a grade 4 or above in English or maths will bring in extra funding per subject, plus
additional funding linked to low prior attainment.
We also plan to revise the 16 to 18 English and maths Progress Measure and the
Qualification Achievement Rates, so that providers are recognised for the progress their
students make towards a Level 2 qualification. This will also help ensure that students are
only resitting their English and maths exams when they are ready to make progress.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
31
Key Stage 3: improving transition and engagement
Key Stage 3 is an important phase that we want schools to give priority to in its own
right, not just as preparation for GCSEs. As well as being the transition to secondary
school, children are consistently taught by subject specialists for each subject. This
allows children to deepen their learning and have broader access to new opportunities for
enrichment - enabling them to discover their interests, grow their talents and, above all,
to enjoy learning.
But currently too many children find this transition difficult, especially alongside
adolescence, and are not benefiting from the breadth of the Key Stage 3 experience,
narrowing their opportunities. Engagement decreases at this phase, 63 absence rates
increase,⁶⁴ and disadvantaged children often further fall behind. 65 Survey data also shows
that white working-class children are more likely to find the transition to secondary school
more difficult than their peers.⁶⁶
As set out in the government response to the Curriculum and Assessment Review, we will
improve coherence and sequencing of the curriculum to avoid the risks of primary content
being repeated in Key Stage 3. We want this phase to be about equipping children to
access the breadth of the curriculum and consolidate the fundamental skills gained at
primary schools. We will also include subject specific disciplinary skills so that children
are challenged to understand more complex concepts. This will improve transition
between Key Stage 2 and Key Stage 3, progress during Key Stage 3, and ensure
children are engaged and grow in capability and confidence. We are already delivering
this by reforming the curriculum and introducing a new digital format so teachers can see
the links between key stages.
We will work in partnership with the sector through a new RISE Key Stage 3
Alliance.
Every secondary school needs to give sufficient priority to organising and strengthening
Key Stage 3. This includes ensuring that children in Key Stage 3 benefit from the full three
years of the key stage. The Alliance will build on excellent sector-led models to support
innovation and spread best practice across the country. This will support schools to
access and develop excellence in Key Stage 3, spotlighting and collaborating on key
issues including the critical transition from primary, teaching and curriculum, attendance,
and strengthening data at Key Stage 3.
Ofsted's new framework supports these ambitions for Key Stage 3. Inspectors gather
evidence of achievement, including how children at Key Stage 1 and 2 develop their
knowledge and skills as they progress into Key Stage 3, and secondary-age children
develop detailed knowledge and skills across the Key Stage 3 curriculum.
32
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
An enriching school day for all
We want extracurricular enrichment opportunities that have previously only been
available to some to be available to all children. Studies have shown that
extracurricular enrichment participation is associated with higher educational
achievement67,68,69 and positive outcomes in adulthood.⁷⁰ It can also support the
development of skills such as teamwork and communication,71 identified as essential
employment skills.⁷² This is particularly important as young people in England typically
have worse socio-emotional skills at age 15 than the OECD average, and inequalities in
these skills are also greater in England than in the other countries that measured these
skills. 73
Many schools already offer high-quality enrichment opportunities, but the offer can vary
significantly between schools. 74 There are also disparities in participation rates, with
lower participation for secondary school children eligible for free school meals⁷⁵,⁷⁶ and
children in need. 77 Children with SEND are less likely to be involved in extracurricular
sports and physical activities. 78,79
These differences in access and participation demonstrate why opportunities must be
embedded within the school curriculum, as well as extra-curricular activities. We will
strengthen the arts, music and PE, as set out in our response to the Curriculum and
Assessment Review. In addition to a high-quality enriching curriculum, every child should
be entitled to a strong and well-rounded wider enrichment offer.
We will publish the Enrichment Framework this academic year.
The framework will support schools and colleges to take a strategic approach to planning,
delivering and monitoring their enrichment offers. It will set out benchmarks on what a
good enrichment offer looks like and include case studies, self-assessment tools, and
signposting to further resources.
As set out in Ofsted's new inspection framework, children's access to opportunities that
broaden their experiences and enable them to develop their talents and interests, is
considered under personal development. Ofsted's update of its inspection toolkits will
take effect from September 2026 and will take account of the new enrichment
benchmarks, in a similar way to the Gatsby Benchmarks currently included in relation to
careers education. In addition, the work we are doing on school profiles will ensure that
before the end of the Parliament, all parents will be getting consistent information on
schools' enrichment offers (Chapter 4: Withdrawn to engaging).
The framework will support schools to meet the expectations we set out in the
government response to the Curriculum and Assessment Review for a new core
enrichment offer that every school and college, in every community, should aim to
provide for all children - beyond the statutory curriculum. At a minimum, every school
should deliver an enrichment offer that provides access to civic engagement; arts and
culture; nature, outdoor and adventure; sport and physical activities; and developing
wider life skills.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
33
Figure 3: Enrichment
Nature, outdoor and
Civic engagement
Arts and culture
adventure
For example,
For example, taking part
For example, time
volunteering, school and
in and having live
outdoors, climate
college democracy and
experience of music, art,
education and
community engagement
dance, theatre and other
sustainability projects,
expressive arts, and
gardening, residentials
visits to museums and
and camps
galleries
Sport and physical
Developing wider
activities
life skills
For participating in
For example, STEM-
individual and team
related enrichments,
sports, physical activities
cooking, debating, and
like dance, fitness
managing finances
activities or cycling,
representing the school
or college, attending live
events
We will build on the wide range of support to help schools offer enrichment
opportunities. As set out in the National Youth Strategy, we will work with DCMS on the
investment of £22.5 million over 3 years to enable up to 400 schools in the most deprived
areas of England to meet the enrichment benchmarks, including delivering the core
enrichment offer set out above. The UK's association to the EU's Erasmus+ Programme in
2027 will also provide international enrichment opportunities. Schools will be able to bid
for funding for children to take part in school trips to another country, or virtual school
partnerships. School staff can also benefit from opportunities through the programme.
The government is also targeting £132.5 million of funding through the 'Every Child Can'
programme to support the provision of services, facilities and opportunities to meet
the needs of young people, particularly those from disadvantaged and
underrepresented backgrounds. Government will work with the National Lottery
Community Fund and young people and youth organisations to decide how this fund is
spent. We are continuing to invest in our national network of music hubs, as well as
34
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
preparing to deliver enhanced PE and School Sport Partnerships. These new partnerships
will support us in our ambition to raise the healthiest generation of children ever by
expanding opportunities for children to access high-quality PE, sport and physical
activity. In June 2025, we announced the government's flagship Tech Youth programme,
which is providing £24 million to deliver high-quality extracurricular technology education
to one million secondary children across the UK.
A broad range of partners are working alongside schools and colleges to help deliver a
high-quality enrichment offer. Philanthropy and civil society have a unique interest and
ability to innovate, mobilise quickly and reach communities in ways government alone
cannot. For example, the Better Futures Fund is the world's largest social outcomes
fund - backed by £500 million of government funding over the next ten years, with plans
to raise up to £500 million from local government, social investors, and philanthropists.
This fund will support up to 200,000 children and their families.
We welcome the commitment from organisations such as the Duke of Edinburgh's Award,
National Youth Theatre, Clore Duffield Foundation, Into Film, Raspberry Pi Foundation,
Young Enterprise, Youth Sport Trust and Natural History Museum to bring their expertise,
passion and programmes to enable schools and colleges to deliver a strong and well-
rounded enrichment offer to all children. We invite further organisations to join this
effort and help broaden the support.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
35
Case study: Enrichment for all
Co-op Academy Glebe's approach to enrichment is rooted in the belief that every
child should have access to memorable, horizon broadening experiences without
barriers. With 58% of children eligible for FSM, leaders intentionally review and
remove hidden costs or obstacles so that all students can participate fully, both
during and beyond the school day. Enrichment is woven directly into a carefully
mapped curriculum, ensuring that children engage in rich and varied experiences
that complement their academic learning. Participation is closely tracked, and
students play a central role in shaping future opportunities through feedback and
leadership roles.
The school aims to be an active, integral part of the community and to help children
understand the world beyond school to raise aspirations. They work closely with
local businesses and charities to support their careers curriculum. Children have
also participated in local and trust wide music productions, written and performed
their own song in conjunction with Port Vale Foundation Trust to raise the profile of
their community projects and engaged in the police cadet programme.
Learning is brought to life through residential trips, local visits, hands-on
workshops, and opportunities that help students build awareness of the community
around them. The school's 101 Things to Do Before You Leave Glebe initiative sets
out an ambitious roadmap of experiences for every child, with achievements
celebrated in a personal Passport of Achievements. This commitment extends
beyond term time through a holiday camp programme that ensures continuity of
experiences and support. By prioritising enrichment as a core part of education -
not an add-on - Glebe develops confident, resilient, and brave learners. The self-
esteem they build outside the classroom directly influences their approach to
challenges within it, contributing to a culture where children are equipped to tackle
problems, embrace new opportunities, and thrive both academically and personally.
Outcomes are consistently strong, with 82% of children meeting the expected
standard in reading, writing and maths in 2025, compared to 62% nationally, and
32% of children achieving a higher standard compared to 8% nationally.
Recognising breadth in our accountability system
High and rising standards for all children must be underpinned by a strong accountability
system. But teachers and parents have told us that, for too long, accountability became
too narrow. The system has not consistently supported a broad curriculum, and in some
cases disincentivised inclusive practice. We tell schools what we value by what we
measure and focus on - and the system has not always reflected the full range of what
children need to achieve and thrive.
Progress 8 is central to this. It has been effective in driving improvement and maintaining
a strong academic core and we must retain it. However, we believe its current design has
hampered progress in subjects which strengthen our economy and society, including the
arts. In our response to the Curriculum and Assessment Review, we committed to consult
on an improved version of Progress 8 that supports a strong academic core with
true breadth for every child. Our response to the Curriculum and Assessment Review,
36
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
and the consultation we are publishing alongside this white paper, explain how the
improved Progress 8 model can help transform a narrow experience for too many children
into one that is rich and broad. Our proposal will retain the current Progress 8 rules on
English and maths and require two dedicated slots for science, recognising its
importance. The proposal requires greater academic breadth and gives parity for creative
subjects by requiring young people to study at least two of languages, creative subjects
and humanities as well as giving space for wider choices.
Figure 4: Progress 8
English
Maths
Science
Breadth
Choice
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
We want school leaders and wider stakeholders to have greater insight into the
performance of their school and children and will provide them with a range of analytics
so that they can prioritise data driven interventions with the greatest impact on children's
outcomes (see Chapter 7: Enabling innovation and ambition).
Careers advice to broaden opportunities
Our refreshed national curriculum will better prepare children for life, future study and
eventually work. It will do this by including subject specific disciplinary skills such as
problem solving in maths, embedding oracy across the curriculum, and identifying
opportunities for children to practice social and emotional attributes such as teamwork in
PE. Beyond this, we will explore opportunities to work with employers to create
opportunities for bringing the curriculum to life. This will help children understand the
relevance of their learning to their future career and find a passion for a future that inspires
them to stretch themselves.
Every child and young person should also have access to high-quality careers advice and
work experience throughout their education, to ensure that they leave education ready for
work and ready for life. Good careers guidance can broaden opportunities in work
and life. This is particularly important for children and young people who have not always
had consistent access to good careers advice, including those with SEND and those from
disadvantaged backgrounds. 80 Transitions and pathways to careers and further training
are core themes of the Independent Inquiry into White Working-Class Educational
Outcomes. Teachers can help with connecting children and young people with the
opportunities of the future, with links to employers that can help broaden horizons.
In our Post-16 Education and Skills White Paper, we set out our vision for high-quality
careers advice and work experience. We have published new careers statutory
guidance, adopting the updated Gatsby Benchmarks for Good Career Guidance. Our
ambition is for every young person to have two weeks' worth of work experience
during their secondary education. This is to ensure that work experience builds across
secondary education, supporting the transition from education and training into
employment, broadening horizons and breaking down barriers to opportunity.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
37
We will continue to facilitate collaboration through career hubs between Strategic
Authorities, local authorities, schools, colleges and employers. This collaboration will
improve careers provision and secure better outcomes for young people. We are
supporting businesses in every region to engage with schools, so that children can
benefit from employer-led insights and experiences. This includes the development of
enterprise and entrepreneurial skills. The Department for Business and Trade's plan for
small and medium sized businesses committed to embed enterprise and
entrepreneurship into all stages of education, so that people can acquire these skills at
any stage of their life or career.
Our collective vision will align careers and work experience programmes with the local
labour market context, targeting skills gaps, supporting growth in priority sectors, and
driving national renewal, with no place or person left behind.
Broader horizons and clear pathways to post-16
The transition into post-16 education is crucial to support children as they become young
adults, broadening their horizons with clear pathways into good jobs and the essential
skills to thrive throughout life. In the Post-16 Education and Skills White Paper, we set
out measures to improve the critical transition between school and further
education. Our cross-government actions are addressing the drivers of disengagement
for young people, especially for those at risk of becoming Not in Education, Employment
or Training (NEET), so that everyone is engaged, included, and has the chance to
succeed. This includes a step change in efforts to raise attendance: for example, new
data tools allowing schools to identify at-risk children early, before absence escalates.
Every child should have a planned destination before leaving school. Schools will
routinely provide targeted support for those at risk of becoming NEET, helping them
choose their next step and successfully transition into post-16 education and training. We
are making this a reality by improving data-sharing between schools, local authorities
and post-16 providers, and automatically allocating young people a place at a local
college or further education provider when they do not have a post-16 study plan. We
also welcome the work being done by The Rt Hon Alan Milburn into Young People and
Work, which will make recommendations aimed at increasing opportunities for young
people who are NEET.
We will make the post-16 system easier to navigate by introducing 'V Levels' as a new
vocational option alongside A levels and T Levels at level 3. We will also strengthen post-
16 level 2 options through two new pathways: an Occupational Pathway to prepare
students for work, and a Further Study Pathway to help students progress to higher levels
of study. These pathways will replace the current complex landscape.
38
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Case study: Effective transitions from school to post-16 for learners
with SEND
To support students with SEND transitioning between school and post-16
education, Derby College designed an eight step package that supports students
from an initial assessment to enrolment. This forms part of their standard
admissions process.
In one example, a student applied to Derby College and the SEND and learning
support team invited the student for an initial assessment to develop a personalised
10-month transition package, designed to allow regular engagement with the
student and offer an insight into college life. The student attended site tours and
met with student support services to provide an initial view of the college before
developing a support plan with the learning support team and attending two
curriculum taster day. The student successfully enrolled and progressed from a level
2 to a level 3 course in the following academic year.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
39
Chapter 3: Sidelined to included
Vision
Schools must be places where every child is included, where they are supported and
challenged to achieve and thrive - regardless of their needs or background. This means
every child having the opportunity to be stretched and challenged, within the curriculum
- with adaptive teaching from expert practitioners - and beyond it. This is key to
improving the life chances of our most disadvantaged children and breaking the link
between background and future success. Yet brilliant schools have too often felt they
are working against the system to include the achievement and experience of children
that the system has sidelined - including white working-class children, children in
entrenched disadvantage, children progressing but capable of more, children who
receive support from children's social care and children with SEND.
Our best schools know that high standards and inclusion work together as two sides
of the same coin. We welcome definitions of inclusion which can help guide actions that
meet all children's needs, including: 'Inclusion is all staff supporting the learning,
wellbeing and safety needs of all children, so that they belong, achieve and thrive'. 81
Within this, it is crucial we go further to deliver inclusion for children with SEND. In doing
so, we will be guided by the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
Every child with SEND deserves the same high standards and expectations. They
deserve schools that build on their strengths, and are better equipped to provide earlier,
evidence-based support. This is a more inclusive mainstream school system, where all
schools consider the evolving needs of children and proactively work to remove barriers
to attainment and engagement for every child and to the benefit of all. Every child should
have the right to go to their local school, within their local community. For children for
whom specialist or alternative provision is the best option, we will ensure high standards
and expectations underpinned by new Specialist Provision Packages.
Case for Change
When children are not included in the system - their voices ignored and needs unmet - it
leads to disengagement, isolation, and lasting educational inequality. For too long, too
many children have been sidelined in our education system: children with SEND,
children from disadvantaged backgrounds - including white working-class children - and
the children who are progressing but capable of more. These children are not succeeding
as they should, with too many children not stretched to achieve all they can. We must
ensure their school experience is an ambitious one in which every child is connected to
the world beyond their existing horizons and perspectives, and never limited by others'
assumptions. Despite the hard work of teachers, leaders, and support staff, too many
children leave full-time education without the knowledge, skills and attributes that will set
them up for adult life.
Children's outcomes are still too often determined by background or circumstances, and
this has led to a failure to close the attainment gaps. We see attainment gaps between
children emerge before school and widen as they progress through their
education. 82,83 Outcomes for disadvantaged children have long been below their
peers, 84,85 and disadvantaged children who were high-achieving at the end of primary are
often outstripped by their lower-achieving but more advantaged classmates by the end of
40
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
secondary school. 86 Within disadvantaged pupil groups, we also see wide variation by
ethnicity. The single largest group is white working-class children,87 who also have
amongst the lowest outcomes. 88
Other groups of FSM eligible children also have particularly low outcomes, especially
White Irish, White and Black Caribbean, and Black Caribbean children. 89 And
disadvantages overlap and compound: outcomes for children both with SEND and
eligible for free school meals are far below their peers who face neither of these
challenges. 90 Research suggests that half of children who do not secure a pass in their
English and maths GCSEs were judged to be behind at age 5.91 Through our strategy
Giving every child the best start in life', we will drive up access to high-quality early
education and care and essential family support services to ensure more children build
the crucial foundations of learning and a record proportion start school ready to learn.
Building on these stronger foundations, this white paper sets out measures that will
support all disadvantaged children to achieve and thrive, including those most
persistently disadvantaged, and specifically addresses the barriers that we know affect
white working-class children.
Compounding these issues, we do not have a truly inclusive mainstream system,
which means children with SEND have too often been sidelined. The system is not
enabling children and young people to get the outcomes and opportunities they
deserve. 92,93 Too often, support for children with additional needs is late, rigid, and locked
behind bureaucratic statutory processes, rather than easily available, provided early and
flexibly to meet children's needs as they evolve over time. Professionals like educational
psychologists are forced to spend too much time on paperwork, rather than being able to
support children directly. 94,95 Inconsistency, a lack of agreement and poorly evidenced
provision in how needs should be identified and met contributes to widespread variations
across schools. 96,97 The increasing reliance on EHCPs as the mechanism to access
support has - over the last decade - shifted the system away from making support
available for early intervention and a strong universal offer.98 As a result of the system's
failure to deliver mainstream inclusion, a greater proportion of the school population is
educated in special schools than at any point in the last half century.99 Our education
system has to be able to adapt to support all children, ensuring that SEND support is
dynamic, well-evidenced and timely, with strong partnerships between mainstream and
special schools. Our plans for this are set out in SEND Reform: Putting Children and
Young People First.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
41
White working-class children: defining and understanding the
challenge
White working-class children are consistently sidelined under our current system.
They have amongst the lowest attainment at GCSE¹⁰⁰ and since the pandemic their
average attainment has got worse, while for many other groups of children it has
improved. 101 These gaps open early in their education, with white FSM-eligible boys
less likely to be "school ready" than their peers, 102 and widen as children progress
through school. 103 White working-class children are also more likely to find the
transition to secondary school more difficult than their peers¹⁰⁴ and have higher
levels of identified SEND. 105 White working-class children's attendance is also lower;
they have among the highest overall absence rates, missing 12% of sessions on
average - more than four weeks a year. 106
An Independent Inquiry into White Working-Class Educational Outcomes has been
commissioned by Star Academies, to investigate the barriers faced by this
particular cohort and understand the underlying reasons behind these trends. The
Inquiry's latest research reaffirms that white working-class children remain one of
the largest and lowest-performing groups in the education system.
The Inquiry also tells us that white working-class children are much less likely to say
they enjoy school. 107 This is supported by similar evidence that finds that this cohort
are more likely to have a negative experience of school overall: they are less likely to
value education, be interested in lessons, put effort into their schoolwork or believe
that they can influence their school outcomes. 108
To address these challenges, this white paper sets out our plans to:
Rebuild early family support to help more disadvantaged children arrive at
reception school-ready, introduce free breakfast clubs and revitalise youth
services (Chapter 1: Our children's futures).
Design a new model for targeting disadvantage funding to help schools deliver
targeted interventions to narrow the attainment gap (Chapter 3: Sidelined to
included).
Launch and fund two place-focused missions - Mission North East and Mission
Coastal - to transform outcomes for young people locally and provide a
blueprint for change nationally (Chapter 3: Sidelined to included).
Recognise schools that are successful in supporting children with the lowest
prior attainment to make good progress during secondary school by consulting
on a new progress measure to sit alongside Progress 8 (Chapter 3: Sidelined to
included).
Develop insights into the relationships between white working-class children
and families with schools, in order to strengthen parental engagement and
ensure every child reaps the benefits of positive school-family relationships
(Chapter 4: Withdrawn to engaging).
42
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Stretch for all children: achieving without limits
Every child should have the opportunity to be stretched and challenged, within and
beyond the curriculum and whatever their starting point. This includes both supporting
those furthest behind and ensuring that children who are progressing but capable of more
are stretched to achieve the very top grades.
Adaptive teaching is key to this - teachers adjusting their methods to get the best out of
every child in the classroom. We are supporting teachers to do this through our Initial
Teacher Training and Early Career Framework, which now includes more content on
adaptive teaching, as well as our SEND CPD programme to give school staff the
expertise to support children with a broad range of needs (see Chapter 5: Support and
investment in high-quality staff).
As set out in our government response to the Curriculum Assessment Review, we will
support teachers to identify and challenge children who have more to give in the
classroom or who are not yet achieving what they possibly could. This does not just mean
focusing on typically high-attaining children but making sure that all children are stretched
and challenged. The curriculum should challenge higher attaining children by allowing
them to deepen their learning, explore concepts in more detail, apply content to different
contexts and make connections between subjects. We know that many schools are
already teaming up to motivate and engage children. We will seek out, optimise and
learn from local and regional partnerships across trusts, local authorities and the
wider education community to support children working at greater depth.
Technology can also support teachers to stretch and challenge children. Oak
National Academy will continue to work with teachers to develop a range of AI tools and
curriculum materials that support them to stretch and challenge all children. See Chapter
7: Enabling innovation and ambition for more detail.
All children should also have opportunities for academic enrichment that extends and
challenges their boundaries and fuels their love of a subject, including competitions,
events and Olympiads amongst groups of local schools and at national and international
level. We are committed to helping schools to identify effective programmes and get the
best out of them.
School Profiles (see Chapter 4: Withdrawn to engaging) will provide transparent
information about the achievement of higher attaining children in a school - for
example, at Key Stage 4 introducing additional information focused on numbers of
children achieving level 7 or above. We must ensure that our accountability system
encourages the same high standards and expectations for children starting from a lower
baseline.
We will consult on a new progress measure to better capture the progress and
achievements of children who start secondary school significantly behind their
peers.
Progress and attainment measures set an expectation that most children should enter at
least 8 GCSEs or equivalent qualifications. For most children this is the right approach,
but at present around 15% of children do not fill all 8 slots within Attainment 8 and
Progress 8, and this rises to 33% for those in the lowest prior attainment group. 109 This
lets children down: both through some children being entered for qualifications they will
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
43
not succeed in; and through not enough attention being given to whether the children
entered for fewer than 8 qualifications are making the progress that they should.
Therefore, we are consulting on a new progress measure to recognise schools who are
successful in achieving progress for all children, in addition to Progress 8, focused on the
progress made by children with the lowest prior attainment.
Case study: Stretching and challenging children
Heanor Gate Spencer Academy stretches all of their children, including high
attainers, to access a broad range of opportunities, build confidence, and succeed.
Within the classroom, all children are given stretching and age-appropriate reading
choices so that they can extend their vocabulary. The school uses Al-based
educational tools to ensure that consolidation activities outside school are bespoke
and provide high-quality challenge at all levels of learning. The school also ensures
that disadvantaged children are stretched and have tailored support by monitoring
their progress and intervening when needed. School leaders closely monitor the
engagement and attendance of children eligible for pupil premium, working
proactively with families to identify and remove barriers.
To stretch high attainers, the school has a wide range of extra-curricular activities.
High attainers in Year 11 are introduced to a Spencer Academies Trust 'Spires'
programme, which they then engage with at post-16. This offers support towards
top tier higher education pathways through visits and mentoring. High attaining
Year 11 students also attend a National Poetry Live event, deepening their
understanding of the GCSE anthology poems. The Year 10 debate club competes at
regional level, ensuring focus on oracy and persuasive language. Year 9 and 10
students engage in both university and employment-based programmes which
inspire females through STEM.
Outcomes are strong, especially for disadvantaged children, with a disadvantaged
A8 score of 42.7, significantly above the national average of 34.9.
Supporting disadvantaged children through focussed funding
We are determined to do more to improve the life chances of our most disadvantaged
children and break the link between background and future success. This white paper
sets out a range of ambitious steps - family support to help more disadvantaged children
arrive in reception school-ready; strengthening teacher recruitment and retention so every
child has high-quality, adaptive teaching; and broadening the curriculum and offering
high-quality enrichment opportunities. Beyond that, we must ensure that funding is
targeted where it is needed most to enable the system to deliver.
The pupil premium grant and schools National Funding Formula deprivation funding
allocations provide over £8 billion of funding to schools, playing a critical role in
narrowing the disadvantage attainment gap and supporting the government's Opportunity
Mission. We have already increased pupil premium funding to over £3 billion for 2025-26,
an increase of almost 5% from 2024-25; and 10.6% of the National Funding Formula -
over £5 billion - was allocated through the National Funding Formula's deprivation factors
in 2025-26.
44
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Both pupil premium and National Funding Formula deprivation funding primarily use Free
School Meals eligibility to identify disadvantaged children. 110 This does not enable
disadvantage funding to schools to reflect different lengths and depths of
disadvantage that children may be experiencing. Attainment is worse on average for
children who have been disadvantaged for a greater proportion of their time in school,
and the gap between the attainment of children with the most long-term disadvantage
and their non-disadvantaged peers has remained stubbornly high, even in the years when
the overall attainment gap between disadvantaged and non-disadvantaged children was
narrowing. 111 Our current method of allocating funding fails to address these key
problems.
Figure 5: The attainment gap for persistently disadvantaged pupils and all
disadvantaged pupils, relative to non-disadvantaged pupils
Key Stage 4
24
22.8
22.6
22.7
22.8
23.0
22.7
22.9
22.7
22.9
22.2
22.4
22.4
22.0
22
19.7
20
19.2
Disadvantage gap (months of learning)
18.9
18.6
18.6
18.8
18.2
18.1
18/1
17.9
18.1
18.1
17.9
18
16
Key Stage 2
14
12.5
12.1
12.1
12.3
12.2
12.3
12.3
21.0
21.1
12.2
11.6
12
10.6
10.1
10.0
10.0
10.3
10.3
9.7
9.6
9.5
10
9.2
9.3
8
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
KS4 persistently disadvantaged pupils
KS2 persistently disadvantaged pupils
KS4 all disadvantaged pupils
KS2 all disadvantaged pupils
Source: Tackling the persistent disadvantage gap - A new approach to deprivation funding - Education
Policy Institute
The stubbornness of these gaps, the lack of progress to date, and the direct impact on
children and young people's life chances, mean that radical action is required. Therefore,
we will boost the impact of the pupil premium and National Funding Formula, by
driving funding to where children's needs are greatest and supporting schools to
implement more effective evidence-based approaches.
We will develop and test a new model for targeting disadvantage funding to help
schools narrow the attainment gap.
While these proposals continue to be developed, the new model has the potential to
significantly rebalance how deprivation funding is distributed to schools, and in turn the
level of support that schools with the poorest children receive.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
45
While developing the new model, we are considering how funding rates could vary
according to the level of disadvantage, so that children with more entrenched
disadvantage attract more funding. Using income data rather than the binary metric of
eligibility for free school meals would enable schools to receive funding, for example
using a stepped model, reflective of the level of disadvantage in their cohort. The model
could take into account how low family income is, and for how long this has been the
case. It would also remove the need for families to choose to take up the offer of a free
meal in order to be eligible for deprivation funding, 112 and reduce the administrative
burden on schools. We are also considering whether to target funding based on the place
a child lives, as well as their individual family economic circumstances.
We will consult on our proposals in Summer 2026, inviting views from the sector and
local communities on how we better allocate funding and address the impact of
entrenched disadvantage on the education outcomes of children. We will consider any
unintended consequences and how proposals will work to raise standards across the
sector.
Driving effective use of pupil premium funding
We will maximise the effectiveness of pupil premium funding by strengthening effective
use in all schools, and by targeting bespoke support to schools with poor outcomes for
disadvantaged children. This two-pronged approach will raise the bar for all schools at
the same time as concentrating support to improve disadvantaged children's educational
attainment where it is most needed.
We will drive better use of disadvantage funding through building a better evidence
base and expert reviews.
We will draw on the wealth of evidence of 'what works' evaluated by the Education
Endowment Foundation (EEF). Resources such as its Teaching and Learning Toolkit,
alongside the Research Schools Network, are widely used and valued by schools. 113
However, there is more to be done to ensure all schools engage with evidence when
deciding how to spend their pupil premium, to make sure that we are optimising every
pound of funding to support disadvantaged children.
We will make the pupil premium strategy statement a more effective tool to support
all schools in planning their use of pupil premium. Innovative digital and data
opportunities offer the possibility to make strategy statements a more effective tool for
schools to plan their use of pupil premium. This will also facilitate sharing of good practice
and provide better information for governors, trustees, Ofsted and RISE.
We will introduce government funded pupil premium strategy reviews for schools
that need additional support. Sector experts will deliver these reviews, providing tailored
advice to help schools plan, implement, and evaluate improvements to their pupil
premium strategy. By focusing on the effective use of funding, these targeted reviews will
equip school leaders to improve outcomes for disadvantaged children. We will develop
the review model with the sector and draw on best practice from expert and peer review
approaches across the public sector.
46
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Case study: Developing an effective pupil premium strategy
Oakdene Primary Academy in Stockton-on-Tees supports a diverse community
where almost half of children have been eligible for free school meals in the past 6
years. Over 80% of their pupil premium funding is spent on high-quality teaching
interventions, such as providing CPD to teachers and support staff, with further
spending on targeted reading, speech and language and writing interventions. 114
Daily classroom observations by school leaders allow them to identify opportunities
for improvement in teaching practice. These lesson visits encourage ongoing
conversations about assessment outcomes, enabling all staff to have a firm
understanding about what each child needs to boost their success.
The school uses termly data points and regular conversations between staff and
leaders as part of a trust wide cycle of improvement. They also conduct reviews to
identify the most effective strategies to overcome barriers to learning, such as
ensuring that disadvantaged children receive a high proportion of teaching from the
most qualified and effective teachers, drawing on our guidance and EEF
evidence. 115,116 This extends beyond disadvantaged children: for example, Oakdene
support children with SEND by assessing and identifying indicators of SEND at the
earliest opportunity and working closely with outside agencies to adapt provision
for these children.
Outcomes are significantly above the local and national averages, with 91% of all
children and 91% of disadvantaged children meeting the expected standard in
reading, writing, and maths in 2025. Oakdene also performs strongly for attendance
with an overall attendance rate of over 97% at the start of 2025/26, ranking the
school first among 21 similar schools.
Targeted missions to tackle entrenched disadvantage
We know that some of the biggest challenges are concentrated in particular places and
communities. That is especially true for white working-class children and young people
growing up in areas where disadvantage is entrenched and outcomes remain stubbornly
low. We are determined to tackle these challenges head on, with a place-based approach
that recognises - as with the London Challenge in the early 2000s - that local context is
critical to sustained improvement.
That is why, alongside our national Call to Action (covered in Chapter 7: Enabling
innovation and ambition):
We will launch and fund two place-focused missions - Mission North East and
Mission Coastal.
Our ambition is that these programmes will transform outcomes for young people locally
and provide a blueprint for change nationally.
Mission North East will focus explicitly on radically improving outcomes for white
working-class children and young people, in communities where attainment gaps are too
often accepted as inevitable. It will bring together clusters of schools facing similar
challenges, diagnose shared barriers to progress and develop a clear strategy for
sustained improvement, backed by strong leadership and practical support.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
47
Mission Coastal will focus on improving outcomes in disadvantaged coastal communities,
where opportunity can be limited by geography, fragile local infrastructure, and the
compounding effects of disadvantage. It will work with schools, school trusts and local
partners to tackle the barriers that hold children back, and to strengthen the conditions
that help young people thrive.
Both missions will be rooted in collaboration. We will establish partnership boards -
drawing on expertise from teachers, local leaders, and the wider public so that the whole
community takes shared responsibility for change. Where barriers to improvement are
persistent - such as low parental engagement - we will take a test, learn and grow
approach, building evidence of what works and scaling successful practice.
Consistent and fair admissions
All children should have access to high performing schools where they can achieve and
thrive. However, more could be done to reduce barriers in the system, particularly for
children from disadvantaged backgrounds, and children with SEND.
We will consult on changes to the School Admissions Code to promote fairness for
all families, particularly the most disadvantaged and children with additional
needs.
We propose requiring schools to give parents more information about decisions on in-
year admission. We will also propose improvements to how fair access protocols are
managed by local authorities, to strengthen the safety net for children struggling to secure
a school place in-year. Finally, we are making the operation of banding arrangements
clearer by requiring schools to set out more details about how their arrangements
work in practice and tightening the rules that ensure banding produces
representative intakes. We will consult on all changes to the School Admissions Code,
including these changes, later in the year.
Access to high performing local schools should not be dependent on factors such as
families' household income or local house prices. The School Admissions Code already
provides tools to ensure schools can achieve representative intakes, particularly for
applicants from a disadvantaged background, by, for example, enabling schools to
prioritise children eligible for the pupil premium. Organisations such as the Sutton Trust
also provide support for schools that are keen to achieve more inclusive intakes. We will
develop new resources to support and encourage schools to adopt more inclusive
admission arrangements, working with key partners and drawing on best practice from
the sector.
Supporting children with SEND
We are publishing our consultation: SEND Reform: Putting Children and Young People
First alongside this white paper. Every child should have the same high standards,
including children with SEND, but our current system is not set up to include them. 117 With
one in three children being identified with SEN at some point in their schooling, 118 we
must equip our schools to identify when children need additional support to achieve
and thrive.
48
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Our landmark SEND reforms have been designed through a process of co-creation with
families, educators, healthcare professionals, local government and with the views of
children and young people themselves. In December 2025, we launched the biggest
National Conversation on SEND which reached over 8,000 people, and we will continue
in that spirit as we move into formal consultation on the changes proposed. Through
those conversations, we have listened to concerns and responded through proposals set
out in this white paper and in our consultation on SEND Reform: Putting Children and
Young People First.
Reflecting what we have heard during the National Conversation, we have revised our five
reform principles, which underpin the changes being proposed:
Our Reform Principles
1. Early. Children and families should receive the support they need as soon as
possible, with a quick response to changing needs. This will start to break the
cycle of needs going unmet and getting worse. Instead, we will intervene swiftly
and proactively, focusing on providing support earlier in children's lives when
this can have the greatest impact.
2. Local. Children and young people with SEND should be able to learn at an
education setting close to their home, alongside their peers, rather than
travelling long distances from their family and community. Specialist settings
should continue to play a vital role supporting those with the most complex
needs.
3. Fair. Every education setting should be resourced and able to meet common
and predictable needs, including as they change over time, without parents
having to fight to get support for their children. Where specialist provision is
needed for children and young people, we will ensure it is there, whether that be
a mainstream, specialist or Alternative Provision setting, with clear legal
requirements and safeguards for children and parents.
4. Effective. Reforms should be grounded in evidence, ensuring all education
settings know where to go to find effective practice that has excellent long-term
outcomes for children and young people.
5. Shared. Education, health and care services should work in partnership with
one another, Best Start Family Hubs, local government, families, teachers,
educators, experts, the voluntary sector and representative bodies to deliver
better experiences and outcomes for all our children and young people. The
voices of children should be at the heart of decision making.
We are committed to creating a more inclusive mainstream school system where more
children can be educated in a local mainstream school, as part of their local
community, with flexible, timely, and accessible support. That means considering the
evolving needs of children and proactively working to remove barriers to engagement and
attainment for every child. It means strengthening partnerships between local mainstream
and specialist provision so children who need further help are supported, and staff are
equipped to meet need.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
49
This shift in approach is central to improving outcomes, especially for children with SEND,
but also for their peers. International evidence shows that children learning alongside
their peers has proven academic and social benefits for all children. 119 We have also
published analysis outlining how more than a decade of data from schools in England
shows children with SEND in mainstream schools achieve half a grade higher, across
each of English and maths GCSEs, than comparable children in special schools. 120 For
children with the most complex needs special schools provide the right environment for
children and young people to make meaningful progress and build independence. Those
schools should also be closely connected to the wider system and their communities.
This will require deliberate planning, engagement with families and partnerships with other
local services to deliver.
One education system
Children's needs, and how they present, change over time as they develop but the
current system is rigid. It takes too long to get support¹²¹ and too often relies on
statutory assessments. We want one education system for all children and young
people, including those with SEND. This means integrating the SEND system within the
mainstream system, so that support can be provided earlier. To achieve this, we need
more flexibility - with support that can be scaled, adapting to the needs of children as
they grow and move through different education phases.
At the heart of this vision is a universal offer of high-quality teaching and support for
all from early years to age 25. Inclusion is at the core, ensuring high-quality adaptive
teaching methods, early support, and opportunities for growth for every child. Over the
next three years, we will invest £1.6 billion to make the mainstream system more
inclusive.
The universal offer will include:
ambitious leadership and governance that embeds inclusion in planning;
evidence-based support prioritising early intervention;
high-quality teaching with a curriculum designed for all learners;
accessible and enriching provision beyond the classroom;
a safe and respectful culture fostering belonging and attendance;
strong partnerships with families and wider services; and
inclusive environments with continuous improvements to accessibility.
In practice, this means commonly occurring needs that every school should be
familiar with can be consistently met in mainstream education through adaptive
teaching, calm environments, and enrichment opportunities. We are not asking teachers
to teach differently, or to work harder. We are giving them the resources they need and
reforming the system so that they do not have to fight against it. The steps we are taking
to support this transition are set out below and in SEND Reform: Putting Children and
Young People First.
50
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
For children and young people who need additional help to access education,
support will be organised across two additional layers of support - Targeted
(including Targeted Plus) and Specialist. Targeted (including Targeted Plus) will provide
structured, evidence-based interventions within mainstream schools, drawing on the
Experts at Hand service (outlined below) to involve education, health and care
professionals, where needed. The Specialist layer will provide a higher level of provision
for children with complex needs, through new Specialist Provision Packages (outlined
below), which will form the basis of EHCPs. For every child receiving Targeted or
Specialist support, regardless of their educational setting, schools will be required to
develop an Individual Support Plan (outlined below). This plan will describe the child's
day-to-day educational provision and the support required, and will be created
collaboratively with parents.
Specialist support will use nationally defined Specialist Provision Packages for
children with the most complex needs. These will be developed and reviewed by an
independent expert panel. These packages will guide provision and eligibility for EHCPs
across mainstream and specialist settings. EHCPs will continue to set out the statutory
entitlement to support for children and young people, with Individual Support Plans
describing the day-to-day provision delivered in schools. Together, this integrated system
aims to deliver an effective education experience for all children and young people.
Figure 6: Layers of support
Children and young people get Targeted support from their
Targeted
setting, outlined in an Individual Support Plan that is developed
with parents.
Children and young people get Targeted Plus support from
Targeted
their setting, with input from education and health professionals.
Plus
School-aged children are also supported through their school
group. Support may include access to a 'Support Base'.
Children and young people receive Specialist support through
an EHCP in mainstream or special setting, if they require
Specialist
provision set out in one of the new nationally defined Specialist
Provision Packages. Support may be delivered through a
'Specialist Base'.
Ensuring SEND support is evidence-based
At present, there is significant inconsistency in how needs are supported across
education settings and local authorities, 122,123 and teachers tell us that further training and
guidance would help them support children with SEND. 124 It is therefore vital that all staff
feel confident in addressing a range of commonly occurring needs, and are
supported to identify barriers and strategies to support children to overcome them.
By 2028, we will invest up to £15 million to build the evidence base for, and then
provide, National Inclusion Standards, a digital library of high-quality identification
tools and provision covering all layers of support for children with SEND.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
51
We will appoint an independent expert panel who will oversee the development of the
National Inclusion Standards and improving the quality of SEND evidence. They will also
oversee the development of the new Specialist Provision Packages to underpin the
specialist system.
The Standards will be informed by evidence, working closely with experts, as well as
children and their families. They will set out what all children and families should be
able to expect from their school. They will also empower leaders with clear, evidence-
based guidance and approaches to make their school more inclusive, and to design
targeted support for specific areas of development. By 2028, the National Inclusion
Standards should guide how schools are meeting the needs of children.
In addition, we will update the SEND Code of Practice to clarify the responsibilities of
education settings and local partners, as well as make the guidance easier to use
and navigate. In this update, we will place a stronger emphasis on an evidence-based,
"support first" approach as part of a whole-setting commitment to inclusion. Additional
professional development and guidance (outlined below) will help educators understand
common barriers to learning and apply universal strategies-based in their practice,
enabling them to recognise and respond to a wider range of needs with greater
confidence. The National Inclusion Standards will provide a clear framework for how the
updated Code should be delivered in practice.
We will also update the Code of Practice to refresh the current four broad areas of need,
which are often unclear and inconsistently applied, replacing them with new areas of
development that reflect key aspects of child development. This will support early,
needs-led provision and help educators identify and address barriers to learning in ways
that are more closely aligned with classroom practice. Further detail on the Standards and
changes to areas of need is set out in SEND Reform: Putting Children and Young
People First.
There will also be a new remit for the Children's Commissioner to provide oversight
and scrutiny of SEND reform implementation. This will include monitoring the progress
and effectiveness of SEND reforms for all children, with a particular focus on children in
care, children in need, children not in school, including those who have been excluded,
intersectionality and those facing multiple disadvantages. The Children's Commissioner
will report publicly at regular intervals on the progress of reforms, including identifying,
gaps, risks, and unintended consequences as well as areas of strength or good practice
that we should build on.
High-quality teaching for all
The universal offer for all children begins with great teaching. High-quality teaching is
the most important lever schools have for improving pupil attainment 125 But teaching staff
are not yet universally confident in supporting children and young people with SEND: less
than three quarters of mainstream school leaders agreed or strongly agreed that their
school could effectively support children with SEND or learning difficulties and
disabilities 126 despite many teachers being keen to expand their knowledge. 127 To address
this, we have launched a new landmark training package for school staff on
supporting children with SEND, with an investment of over £200 million over three
years.
52
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
From September 2026, all staff nationwide will be able to benefit from new training
across early years, schools, and post-16, supported by government-backed training
materials. The updated SEND Code of Practice will set out a requirement for all schools
to ensure that their staff receive training on SEND and inclusion. Expert adaptive teaching
is key to meeting the needs of all children, 128,129 and should be woven into everything that
schools do. This is not about asking teaching staff to do more, or to focus their attention
on a few children and young people - but about making sure that support is there for
every child. We will support teachers to constantly adjust their methods to bring out
the best in every child in the classroom - it is second nature to many experienced
teachers and support staff. National training will help both newer and more experienced
teachers to develop their skills in building inclusive learning environments and spotting
needs early so that children receive timely support.
This new training offer builds on improvements to existing teacher training
programmes, including the Initial Teacher Training and Early Career Framework
introduced in September to ensure both new and existing staff are trained to adapt their
teaching for all children, and particularly to meet the needs of children with SEND. We
have already strengthened requirements for training providers to ensure early career
teachers receive clear guidance on SEND, and will review this again in 2027 to ensure
they continue to reflect the latest evidence. A review of National Professional
Qualifications is also underway to embed best practice, alongside a planned review of the
Early Career Teacher Entitlement in 2027. For early years, we will consult with the early
years sector on teacher training routes and course content; this will inform training in
inclusive practice for early years teachers. We plan to expand access to this training
route, more than doubling the number of EYITT places by 2028.
Together, these measures will ensure all new and existing teachers and leaders are trained
to support a wide range of needs and reinforce that inclusive practice is a shared
responsibility across all staff. Within this strengthened system, schools will be
supported to use the expertise of Special Educational Needs Co-ordinators (SENCOs)
more effectively. Through our reforms, we anticipate the role becoming more strategic and
less administrative. Digital processes, clearer expectations for all and improved access to
specialist support will reduce routine administration, enabling the SENCO to focus on
strategic leadership and supporting the development of high-quality practice across the
school. More detail on the future role of SENCOs is included in SEND Reform: Putting
Children and Young People First.
Stronger communication about children's needs
Clear and consistent communication is essential to reforming the SEND system.
Families, education settings and professionals need a shared understanding of children's
needs, what support looks like, when it will be delivered, and how it will work across all
phases of education. Currently, information about children's needs is often fragmented
across multiple systems, making it harder to keep records accurate and up to date. This
can lead to delays in support and gaps during key transitions, such as moving from early
years to school or school to college. Parents often report having to retell their story and
explain their children's needs multiple times to different professionals or settings. A
responsive, accessible, digital way of recording needs and provision will ensure help is
provided quickly and effectively, reducing the risk of challenges escalating and improving
continuity of support.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
53
We will require all schools and other educational settings to create digital Individual
Support Plans for any child or young person with identified SEND
The plans will capture barriers to learning, day-to-day provision, any reasonable
adjustments and intended outcomes. They will be developed with input from and to
communicate with parents, strengthening collaboration between home and school. Our
ambition is for plans to be interactive, digital, accessible and integrated with wider
services over time, so that identifying and communicating any support required is simpler
and more effective. This approach will ensure support remains responsive throughout
a child's education, facilitating smooth transitions and reassuring families that their
child's needs will be recognised and met. We will set a requirement for Individual
Support Plans to be reviewed annually at a minimum, which will involve discussions with
parents. The use and quality of Individual Support Plans will be assessed through
Ofsted's inspections and assessment of SEND provision at a setting level.
Case study: Inclusive practice in schools
Tanfield School is a secondary school in County Durham which provides a range of
support for children with SEND, particularly around transitions. For children with
SEND, the school works closely with their primary school to understand their needs
and put in place support for when they begin, such as specialist group interventions
for literacy and numeracy. This support can start as early as Year 4, with their school
SENCO offering support such as information evenings, transition days, summer
school, online hub access and additional visits from years 4-6. Tanfield also has
Year Managers that are dedicated to offering pastoral support to children and
families to make the transition as smooth as possible, such as support on uniform,
homework or wellbeing. This support extends throughout their time in school:
inclusive high-quality teaching is regarded as foundational for student success,
particularly for children with SEND. To ensure learning is accessible to all,
adaptations are made according to children's individual needs, such as changes to
teaching strategies, adjustments to the curriculum, or the use of recommended
classroom aids. Tanfield has a high proportion of disadvantaged students, but
through their welcoming and engaging ethos, their students exceed academically.
Absence is lower than the national and local authority averages, and outcomes are
well above national and local averages, with an Attainment 8 score of 57.5
compared to 46.0 nationally and 44.1 for their local authority. Tanfield School is also
partnered with a school through the RISE programme to support continued
improvement.
54
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Access to specialist support for SEND - Experts at Hand
Teachers and education leaders consistently tell us that better access to expert advice
and support - including from health professionals such as speech and language
therapists - is one of the most effective ways to meet the needs of children and
young people with SEND. 130,131 This support will primarily apply to children for whom
specialist input is essential to help them thrive in mainstream education or the specialist
system. We will create more opportunities for health professionals to work directly with
school staff and groups of children as needed. This will help upskill staff in mainstream
schools, provide timely support for commonly occurring needs, and ensure schools have
quick and flexible access to expert advice.
We will invest £1.8 billion over the next three years in support services to improve
access to health professionals such as speech and language therapists and
educational psychologists for children and young people in early years settings,
schools and colleges.
This funding will enable local authorities and Integrated Care Boards to establish an
Experts at Hand Offer. This offer will be delivered both through partnerships with
education and health services, and through outreach from specialist settings. £1 billion
will fund expert professionals to work directly with mainstream schools, improving early
support without requiring an assessment or referral, while £800 million will build the
capacity of mainstream schools through expanding outreach from specialist and
alternative provision settings. It will take time to embed these changes, but we anticipate
that by the end of 2028-29, this funding would mean a typical school could benefit from
annual support which is equivalent to 40 days per average primary school, and 160 days
per average secondary school. 132
We will invest over £40 million over three years to grow the educational psychology
and speech and language therapy workforce, addressing long-standing shortages
and reducing waiting times.
This includes training over 200 additional educational psychologists per year from 2026
and 2027, with further investment to train more over the following three years. This is
alongside expanding speech and language therapy apprenticeships and introducing local
speech and language therapist advanced practitioners and support workers in every
Integrated Care Board area. We will bring more expert advice and services from education
and health professionals (such as education psychologists or speech and language
therapists) into mainstream education settings.
This builds on the emerging evidence from Early Language Support for Every Child
(ELSEC) and Partnerships for Inclusion of Neurodiversity in Schools (PINs), which show
the benefits of embedding health and other specialist professionals in mainstream
schools to de-escalate needs.
As part of this, we will reform the role of Alternative Provision so that expertise in
supporting children with SEND - particularly those whose needs present as disruptive
or unsafe behaviour - can be used more effectively across the school system.
This will include outreach into mainstream schools for preventative support, time-limited
placements to assess and address needs before reintegration, and longer-term
placements where necessary, with a focus on progression to appropriate post-16
provision and employment.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
55
We want to strengthen existing local strategic SEND partnerships and strategic
planning across the country. These partnerships - bringing together stakeholders from
the local SEND system including parent representatives - should give all schools
influence over shared services and support to children with SEND. This will help with
planning for specialist resources such as speech and language therapists, occupational
therapists, educational psychologists and therapy assistants.
Direct responsibility over SEND funding
Education leaders, governors, and trustees will be expected, and supported, to
create the conditions needed for all children and young people to achieve and
thrive. This includes accessing a high-quality curriculum, including enrichment
opportunities, and developing the skills needed to live fulfilling adult lives. For many
schools and trusts, this will mean refining and strengthening what they already do; for
others, it will require a more significant shift - placing inclusion at the centre of their
approach and fully embracing their responsibilities alongside their local community. This
will focus on understanding needs, adaptive teaching, a well-sequenced curriculum, calm
environments, high standards of attendance and behaviour, and access to a broad range
of academic and enrichment opportunities so that all children are supported to achieve
and thrive. On top of the support provided through guidance, sharing of best practice,
RISE networks, and their local school groups, we will support them through funding.
From 2026-27 onwards, we will provide £1.6 billion for a new Inclusive Mainstream
Fund over three years, with over £500 million per year over the next three years to
mainstream schools and other educational settings.
This new fund will give schools and other education settings direct responsibility over
funding to empower them to deliver for children and young people with SEND. This will
enable them to plan proactively and flexibly for commonly occurring needs and
encourage earlier and more effective support. They will be able to use this funding,
combined with funding for inclusion already in their budgets, to develop targeted,
evidence-based support offers such as transition programmes or group interventions -
without requiring formal assessments or diagnoses. For example, programmes like NELI
(Nuffield Early Language Intervention) and ELSEC (Early Language Support for Every
Child) could be funded to strengthen language development and early communication
skills. This funding will also help strengthen the universal offer and targeted layers of
support.
Schools will be required to publish an Inclusion Strategy outlining how resources
are deployed to benefit children with SEND, which will be subject to oversight and
challenge. Changes to the funding system will ensure schools have the resources and
flexibility to maximise impact for children, while reducing reliance on costly statutory
processes.
Schools and other education settings will be held accountable for how they use all
their inclusion funding, including both the new Inclusive Mainstream Fund resource and
the funding they already receive to provide support for children with SEND through their
notional SEN budgets (and future funding through the National Funding Formula linked to
SEND-related factors). Over time, there will be further rebalancing of funding from the
High Needs budget, and this will also be part of these accountability arrangements.
Further details on our plans are set out in SEND Reform: Putting Children and Young
People First.
56
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Collaboration between schools to deliver SEND support
Schools will need to work collaboratively to drive up the quality and scale of inclusive
provision, through setting consistent standards and sharing resources to best support
their children.
We propose that every school should be part of a local grouping to work together
on SEND.
While some forms of SEND need are relatively common and would be expected in every
school, other needs are less common and can require more specialist support. In the long
term, we propose requiring all schools to pool a minimum level of funding to support
needs fairly across their group. This pooled funding will be used collectively to meet the
needs of children with SEND including through sharing expertise, resourcing, staffing,
support bases and commissioning of shared resources, such as specialist teachers.
As set out in Chapter 6: Collaboration between schools and with other partners, we are
moving over time to all schools joining or forming high-quality school trusts with
coherence and scale. However, as many schools are not yet in a trust with sufficient scale
or local presence, in the immediate term many SEND groups may consist of local groups
of schools working together. This could include maintained schools working with
schools in trusts that are geographically dispersed, for example.
We will look to local authorities and their partners to shape the formation of groupings
in their areas, and have an oversight role for the local authority groups. Over the next
three years we will expect all schools to join SEND group structures and agree operating
principles, including peer support and challenge. We also expect them to work as a group
with their local authority and Integrated Care Boards to scope the offer of support across
their local area and develop a strategic plan for SEND. Through the consultation, we will
explore options for how groups of schools and local SEND and alternative
provision partnerships might work together, including how we can ensure they align
clearly with the wider local plan for the SEND system.
Case study: Inclusive and holistic support
At Winyates Primary School in Peterborough, their holistic ethos and high ambitions
for all children result in strong outcomes. All children are set up to thrive with high-
quality teaching and targeted support when needed. The school follows a
graduated approach to supporting SEND, following a cycle of assess, plan, do and
review, to monitor pupil progress and remove any barriers to learning. Quality-first
teaching is the foundation for all pupils, and teachers know their learners well,
enabling early identification of needs and timely support such as group interventions
or curriculum adaptations. With inclusion and adaptive teaching strategies
embedded into everyday teaching, children with SEND are able to learn amongst
their peers and are involved in all aspects of school life. Outcomes are above
average, with 76% of pupils meeting the expected standard of reading, writing and
maths in summer 2025, above the national average of 62% in the same period.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
57
Specialist Provision
As outlined above, we propose moving to a model of support based on a continuum of
provision where children with the most complex needs have comprehensive packages of
support, known as Specialist Provision Packages, supported by an EHCP. At present,
there is inconsistency in how needs are identified and met. The current EHCP model
makes it hard for schools to promptly adapt as needs emerge and change over time,
which leaves too many children and young people with provision that is not necessarily
suitable.
133,134,135
Therefore, working with experts, we propose introducing new Specialist Provision
Packages, which will form the basis for an EHCP.
These will be nationally defined, evidence-based packages of support for children
and young people with the most complex needs, setting out the specific interventions,
resources, and standards required to support them. EHCPs will guarantee statutory
entitlements to the educational provision from the Specialist Provision Package that
children and young people need, and their expected outcomes, alongside care provision
and statutory entitlements to health provision. The detailed day-to-day educational
provision will be set out in Individual Support Plans (as outlined above). These changes
will ensure that high-quality, evidence-based offers of support are provided consistently
across the country for those with the most complex needs, whilst allowing for schools
and other education settings to adapt day to day provision as needs change over time.
For children under 5 who have been identified as having complex needs, we will work
with the Department of Health and Social Care and NHS England to introduce a fast-track
route to support.
The proportion of school children with an EHCP is currently 5.3%, and has risen sharply.
We expect that EHCP numbers will increase but at a slower rate through to 2029/30 as
we begin to invest in the new system and equip mainstream nurseries, schools and
colleges to meet needs earlier. As reforms become embedded, we expect the number of
children and young people needing a Specialist Provision Package, and hence an EHCP
to access support, will return to around today's level by 2035, with many more children
having their needs met through an ISP in mainstream. 136
We know it will be vital to manage the transition to a new system of support carefully.
That is why our investments begin now, ahead of any forthcoming legislation, to enable
early years settings, schools and colleges to prepare and build capacity for reform. It is
also crucial that we manage the transition to the new system carefully for those already
receiving statutory support.
From now until new legislation begins, the current SEND system - including all existing
duties, rights and funding routes - will remain in place, and we will ensure these
duties continue to be met. Once legislation is introduced, more children will get the help
they need directly from support available in their school or setting, including through
Experts at Hand, without requiring an EHCP. Any child who already has an EHCP (or has
been assessed as needing one) at the point legislation commences will keep their plan
and its provision until they finish their current phase of education or choose to move to
the new system. Children with an EHCP in the early years will retain it until they complete
the primary phase, when it will be reviewed.
58
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
After legislation takes effect, children with an existing EHCP will have a needs
assessment as they approach the end of each phase of education. The local authority
will determine whether they require a Specialist Provision Package and therefore a
continued EHCP; if so, a new EHCP will be created based on the relevant Package,
supported by an Individual Support Plan setting out day-to-day educational provision. If
they do not require a Package, they will move to an Individual Support Plan in a
mainstream school and receive support through the Universal and Targeted layers. The
first cohort to transition will be pupils at the end of primary, secondary and post-16 in
2029/30, with assessments from September 2029 and moves to the new system from
September 2030; those moving to Individual Support Plans will keep their existing EHCP
until the end of that academic year. All children transitioning from an EHCP to an
Individual Support Plan will retain the right to request a mainstream placement, and no
child will move from a special school or college unless they choose to do so.
Specialist settings - including in early years, special schools, alternative provision, and
specialist post-16 institutions - - will play a dual role: delivering high-quality education for
those with the most complex needs, and acting as catalysts for improvement across the
system through outreach, short-term placements, and joint professional development.
We will also change the law on independent special schools to ensure that children
get suitable high-quality placements and that local authorities pay a reasonable price
for them.
Schools designed to be inclusive
We are already creating 10,000 more school and college places for children and
young people with SEND by investing £740 million in 2025-26. This funding will
support a more inclusive mainstream school system by increasing the number of
specialist and support bases and adapting the school estate so that more children with
SEND can learn in a local mainstream setting in their community. This includes creating
breakout rooms or sensory spaces where children can regulate, improving ventilation to
create a more comfortable sensory environment, or adding ramps and accessible
changing facilities. This expansion is reflected in the Education Estate Strategy published
earlier this year, supporting an estate that is suitable to meet the need of children and
young people with SEND, increase local capacity, and allow significantly more children to
benefit from this provision.
We will create a further 50,000 new specialist places, including in inclusion bases,
backed by £3 billion investment over the next four years and our commitment to deliver
free schools or alternative funding in place of schools. These will give children with
additional needs the opportunity to learn in mainstream schools, alongside their peers.
Funding can be used to adapt buildings and buy equipment to make the estate more
inclusive and accessible.
Inclusion bases will offer specialist support in mainstream schools and colleges so
that more children get the opportunity to be educated in a local mainstream setting. For
some children, this support will enable them to gradually transition to full participation in
mainstream classes. For others, ongoing support from the base will help them access
mainstream learning, education and their wider community in a way that works for them.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
59
Through these bases, we aim to make inclusive support more widely available.
Bases will be backed by clear guidance, which will form the benchmark for Ofsted
inspections, and national best practice networks to ensure that settings high-quality
inclusion bases and specialist provision in mainstream schools and colleges are
recognised and celebrated, while also being held to account for delivering high-quality
provision. Over time, we expect every secondary school will have an inclusion base, with
an equivalent number of places in local primary schools. For many settings, where high-
quality support is already being provided, it will be a continuation of best practice we see
across the country. For some, this will be using the provision they have in a different way;
and where there is a need to create new places, including by repurposing and improving
existing space, this can be supported by our capital investment. Further detail can be
found in SEND Reform: Putting Children and Young People First.
In addition to these steps to enable schools to be more inclusive, through their new
education inspection framework, Ofsted is - for the first time - grading inclusion, to
hold all settings to account for their inclusive practice. This evaluates how leaders set
high expectations for all children and young people, including those with SEND, and put
the right support in place to meet their needs. Ofsted Inspectors have received significant
additional training focused on their renewed approach to inclusion, as part of both an
Underpinning Skills Programme and face-to-face inspector training. We will also work
with Ofsted to develop early insights on how mainstream schools are successfully driving
inclusion, including through the use of inclusion bases in schools.
60
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Chapter 4: Withdrawn to engaging
Vision
Our very best schools know that children achieve most when they feel safe and
connected to their school environment. They show that high expectations for academic
excellence and deep pupil engagement go hand in hand. They build relationships with
parents and communities, working with health and local government services, to deliver
calm, safe classrooms, meet children's needs and enable them to achieve and thrive.
Every school and every classroom should be a safe, calm and supportive place, where
every child feels they belong. This in turn will improve young people's engagement with
learning, motivate them to stretch themselves and succeed in life.
This vision requires strong partnerships between families and schools, with parents
included and engaged in their child's learning, attendance and behaviour at school -
including when their child moves within the school system. We want to see impactful and
consistent parent-school engagement across the country, building on and spreading the
impactful and innovative ways that many schools have developed to engage families to
improve their children's outcomes. To help parents to engage, we will give them a more
complete picture of their child's school.
These partnerships are critical to improving attendance and standards of behaviour at
school. Attendance is key to achieving high standards, narrowing the disadvantage
gap and supporting children with SEND. Expectations and standards of behaviour
must be similarly high and consistent across all schools, with schools using support
and sanctions together to provide all children with the benefit of a calm and inclusive
environment.
Case for change
Children need to thrive, with a deep sense of engagement, belonging and inclusion, in
order to achieve and excel at school. But too many children are withdrawn - their
engagement with school life is low and they do not feel like they belong at school. This is
particularly stark for children facing other barriers to learning: those with SEND and
disadvantaged children (see box below on 'Pupil belonging: the scale of the challenge').
Parent-school relationships have been increasingly strained since the Covid-19
pandemic. More than half of school leaders report strained parent relationships as a
source of stress or unhappiness - 14 percentage points higher than in 2018, showing an
upward trend that has accelerated since the pandemic. 137 Too many parents say they do
not get enough information on how to support their child's learning at home, 138 and
information on school performance and enrichment offers can be difficult for parents to
find. When children move within the school system, there is a lack of visibility that puts
vulnerable children, including those with SEND, at risk of missing education or receiving
provision that does not meet their needs.
Children need to attend school and learn in calm, safe classrooms in order to achieve and
thrive. Yet, despite recent improvements, pupil absence and misbehaviour are too
high. Around one in five children still miss a day or more of school every fortnight, 139 and
teachers report seven out of every 30 minutes of teaching time is lost to misbehaviour. 140
We must address these issues to ensure that all children, particularly those sidelined in
the system, are engaging with their education.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
61
Pupil belonging: The scale of the challenge
Between 2014 and 2022, the proportion of children at secondary school reporting
that they liked school "a lot" halved, and England saw a drop of over 20 percentage
points in pupils' sense of belonging. 141 This decline in school belonging is also seen
internationally but is particularly stark for the UK and England, which both ranked
poorly on this measure compared to other OECD countries in 2022. 142 There are
particular challenges for children transitioning into secondary, with more than one in
four children beginning to disengage from school during Year 7. This problem is also
worse for many of the children we most need schools to be reaching - children on
free school meals are less likely to enjoy school, less likely to trust other children at
school, and report worse relationships with teachers than their peers. 143 In addition,
children with SEND, children in need and those eligible for free school meals all
report lower school belonging. 144
This is not a side issue - compelling evidence shows that positive pupil
engagement, including things like having a sense of belonging at school, are key to
tackling some of the most important barriers to opportunity. Evidence shows that
pupil engagement and belonging have clear positive relationships with
attainment 145,146 and school attendance 147 School belonging also influences
children's long-term outcomes, with evidence showing those with good belonging
at school are less likely to be NEET¹⁴⁸ and more likely to have good mental health149
as they get older.
Building children's sense of belonging and engagement
Every school should be a safe, calm, and caring place where every child feels they
belong and are seen. When children feel connected and valued alongside excellent
teaching, they are more likely to attend and engage more fully with learning, and stretch
themselves - leading to improved attainment 150,151 and long-term life chances. 152,153
To help build a sense of belonging, understanding children's experiences is essential to
identify how we can best support them. For the first time, we have brought together
survey data on pupil experiences in school in the publication Pupil experiences in school:
academic year 2024 to 2025. This will be published annually to provide a national picture
of pupils' engagement and belonging that will inform government policy and provide
benchmarks for schools monitoring similar trends.
62
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Case study: National engagement insights for school improvement
Schools are taking new approaches to measure pupil, employee and family
engagement. One example is The Engagement Platform (TEP). TEP works with
schools, local authorities and trusts nationwide to generate data insights on their
performance, to target their practice and improve outcomes.
TEP data, now drawing from 300,000 children, indicates that low engagement is
often linked to low attainment outcomes and poor attendance. Secondary school
pupils with lower engagement scores are around three times more likely to be
persistently absent than pupils with high engagement scores. 154
Equipping schools with data on pupil engagement enables them to target
interventions and improve practice. Schools focusing on activities such as
improving transition support, actively listening to pupil and employee groups, and
using inclusive routines, have been able to achieve engagement scores that are
better than the national average.
We know that many schools are already building a sense of belonging within their
schools. Around 60% of schools (76% of secondary schools) report that they are already
measuring factors related to pupil engagement and belonging. 155 By 2029, we expect
every school to monitor pupils' sense of belonging and engagement so that more
children - including those who are disadvantaged or have SEND - will feel a sense of
belonging in school. This will support leaders, teachers and other education staff to better
understand how their school's ethos, culture, and practices impact the experiences and
engagement of their pupils.
To support this expectation:
We will publish a new Pupil Engagement Framework later this year to enable all
schools to measure the key factors that determine their children's engagement in
education and make improvements.
The Framework will be informed by insights from children, parents and carers, school
leaders, partners and experts, and will highlight a range of good practice examples. It will
provide schools and measurement providers with a standard set of well-evidenced
questions for pupils that are actionable. This will include advice on how to measure
factors such as children's sense of school belonging and safety, inclusion, relationships
with teachers and peers, their motivation and how much they value school. We expect
schools to make effective use of this data, highlighting evidence-based practice that can
be embedded into their improvement plans, which not only improve engagement, but also
support outcomes including attendance and attainment.
As part of these efforts, we want to ensure that all children can learn in an environment
where they feel safe and supported.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
63
The government's Race Equality Unit will work with us to undertake further research
on the issue of racist abuse in schools. This will include direct engagement with
pupils and teachers and help develop a more detailed understanding of what works to
ensure our schools are spaces where all children feel like they belong, enabling greater
attendance, attainment and engagement.
Following high-profile incidents and growing concern about antisemitism in schools and
colleges, we also recently announced an independent review to help ensure all schools
and colleges have the right systems and processes in place to identify and respond to
antisemitism and related issues. This will commence from this Spring.
From a broken social contract to families as partners
Children achieve and thrive when families and schools work in partnership. The
Education Endowment Foundation found that on average, parental engagement initiatives
have a positive impact of 4 months additional progress on average over the course of a
year for children in early years and primary. 156 Wider evidence shows the benefits of
parental engagement throughout children's time at school. 157,158,159
Many parents want to be more involved in their child's education, and many have a
favourable view of the education their child receives. However, a third of parents of
primary children, and half of parents of secondary children say they do not get enough
information on how to support their child's learning outside the classroom. 160 We know
some schools have reported that reaching and engaging all parents in their schools can
be challenging. These barriers to engagement with schools are greater for families
facing intersecting challenges such as poverty, issues with housing, or juggling multiple
jobs. 161 In some cases, disengagement is rooted in multi-generational distrust or negative
experiences with education, 162 and this can lead to distant, or even adversarial
relationships between families and schools.
Schools and families have been left to navigate this largely on their own for far too long.
While many schools have developed impactful and innovative ways to do this, we must
improve the consistency and impact of the engagement between schools and
families.
We will work closely with schools, trusts, local authorities, communities, families and
family-facing organisations to establish minimum expectations that supports the
creation of meaningful home-to-school partnerships.
These principles will make clear what families can expect from schools, and what
schools will expect of families in return. We will provide schools with the tools to
support engagement and embed best practice by sharing case studies of successful
school and trust level parental engagement strategies, with guidance on commonly used
and effective approaches, such as Home School Partnership Agreements. We will also
increase awareness and build on the learning of existing programmes, such as
ParentKind's Parent Friendly Schools Accreditation, where schools can develop new or
improved whole-school strategies, and promote innovation to scale promising solutions
through our Call to Action.
We want to build on the findings from the Independent Inquiry into White Working-Class
Educational Outcomes to have better insight of issues specific to white working-class
children, families and their relationships with schools, and will also continue to consider
64
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
barriers specific to other communities, such as language or financial barriers. These
findings will feed in to how we co-design the minimum expectations on parental
engagement, to ensure white working-class children can also reap the benefits of positive
school-family relationships.
We expect the minimum expectations to cover the following topics:
Effective and timely school communication, including the data and
information that schools routinely share (such as attendance, behaviour,
curriculum, academic progress, and upcoming events or activities) making use
of available technology to share up-to-date information where possible, while
also setting out how families should engage effectively and respectfully with
schools.
Establishing high expectations of families, highlighting how they are
important partners in their children's learning, including how they value daily
attendance, uphold behaviour standards, actively engage in their child's
progress, and engage effectively and respectfully with schools.
Supporting effective transitions between early years, schools and key stages,
and into post-16 provision, including in how families can support effective
transitions.
Empowering families to support learning at home by signposting practical
guidance, support, and resources.
Creating a strong school culture with regular opportunities for families to be
part of school life. Parent-led groups, such as Parent Teacher Associations, can
play an important role in school life, supporting parents and the wider school
community.
We will support schools to continue to build on existing good practice with more
targeted approaches to identify and implement appropriate support to build trusting
relationships and support parents to overcome barriers. Our reforms to provision for
children with SEND will help schools identify evidence-based approaches for inclusive
teaching practices and cultures that will support children's achievement, attendance
and belonging at school.
Through our engagement with families and local authorities, we will work to understand
the existing support in the system to equip parents for active engagement in their
child's education, including through the provision of parenting programmes. In extreme
cases where families consistently fail to engage in cooperating with the school, we will
ensure schools understand the powers that exist to mandate engagement where it is
lacking.
The minimum expectations will also outline the crucial role that families play in children's
learning and wider development, and the expectations of parents and carers in
supporting their child to flourish at school. We will include the voice of parents in all our
thinking as work develops. In addition to home-to-school partnerships, we will equip
families with the tools they need to support their children to develop and learn at home as
well as at school. We will work with local authorities and health to better support families,
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
65
learning from the approaches used in programmes such as Best Start Family Hubs, to
provide evidence-based guidance for families with advice on how to support
learning at home and overcome barriers like access to technology or study space.
We will review the current offer for online family support and work with parents and
carers to create a one-stop shop of age-appropriate support and advice.
This will help parents with information on how to support learning at home, on transition
through the school system, and issues we know families care about like managing
behaviour, sleep, keeping children safe online, and screen time. For example, with
DHSC, we will publish new guidance on screen use for under-fives by April 2026 and also
support families with guidance for parents of children aged 5 to 16. This sits as part of the
government's consultation on children's use of social media to protect children's
wellbeing.
While we expect that improved partnerships between families and schools will help
prevent concerns from escalating, the complaints system must work better for all
involved. The new system must be clear, effective, command the confidence of families,
and remove unnecessary workload and stress for school leaders and staff so that
complaints are resolved effectively, efficiently and with mutual respect. We have worked
with the Improving Education Together (IET) group to develop and agree changes to
improve the school complaints system subject to user testing with families and the
sector:
We will create a new digital, accessible solution for handling complaints that will
aim to simplify the process, improve coordination between multiple bodies, improve
complaints data collection, and stop complaints being escalated through multiple
avenues in parallel.
We will set out new mutual expectations for complaints handling with clear and
consistent timeframes for resolving complaints to help schools with managing
expectations, while ensuring that families feel reassured about what to expect.
This will be supported by advice and case studies to help schools identify and handle
vexatious complaints. We will update our guidance to make clear to parents and the
sector which national organisation is best placed to consider specific complaints, to
reduce complaints going to multiple organisations at once. We have worked with the
charity ParentKind and the IET to support the development of a 'Parent's Guide to
School Complaints', which is a step-by-step guide to help parents better understand the
complaints process, with a focus on trying to resolve issues at the earliest point and
before they become a complaint.
We will work with the sector and parents to strengthen the independence of
complaints panels. We will consult on introducing the requirement for maintained
schools to include an independent member on complaint panels.
This will give families confidence that their complaint has been assessed fairly and
objectively.
In rare cases, we know that parental actions towards school staff have escalated beyond
what is acceptable. Abuse of staff will never be acceptable, whether in person or
online. We will work with the sector to support them to collect more thorough and
66
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
consistent reporting of incidents and consider the case for national monitoring in such a
way which minimises the reporting burden. We will provide new guidance to schools,
trusts and local authorities so that staff are better supported where cases of bullying and
harassment take place, as set out in Chapter 5: Support and investment in high-quality
staff.
Giving parents a more complete picture of school
Data about school performance, information on enrichment and the opportunities schools
provide to young people is scattered in different places and can be difficult for parents to
find. We want to bring all of this together in one clear, accessible place, giving parents a
stronger, more complete picture of each school.
We will develop new School Profiles to give parents a rounded picture, by bringing
useful and up-to-date information about schools together in one place.
The new School Profiles service will include information from Ofsted's most recent report
card for the school, along with the latest data on attainment, progress and attendance.
We will also explore including wider information to give a more rounded picture of each
school. As well as enhancing transparency, along with Ofsted's broader and more
granular reports, it will hold schools to account for their performance across a range of
areas that drive children's outcomes. We are piloting the service this school year, ready to
launch it in the next school year.
The Post-16 Education and Skills White Paper sets out our commitment to consider
changes to published performance data to help young people, their families, and
employers make more informed decisions. We will therefore conduct further research this
year to explore similar profiles for 16 to 19 providers.
High standards in attendance
For many children, poor attendance can be both a symptom and a cause of
disengagement in education. Attendance is key to achieving better outcomes, narrowing
the disadvantage attainment gap and supporting children with SEND. 163,164 But we are
facing significant challenges in attendance, with around 1.5 million children missing a
day or more every fortnight at the start of this Parliament. 165 Thanks to the efforts of
school staff and parents, we are beginning to see progress, with record improvements in
2024/25 including 140,000 fewer children persistently absent. 166 But there is more to do.
This is why our ambition is to improve school attendance back to pre-pandemic levels
and beyond, to ensure all children are engaged and learning.
As a first step towards that ambition, we are setting a target to improve the
attendance rate by 1.3 percentage points compared to 2023/24, to over 94%
- equivalent to children attending 20 million more days of school each year from
2028/29.167
That would recover learning time equivalent to 100,000 pupils attending school full time
and represent the fastest rate of improvement in over a decade¹⁶⁸ - delivered through
RISE attendance and behaviour hubs, world-leading data tools, parental engagement and
support from local authorities and wider services including healthcare and family support.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
67
Over the past eighteen months, we have delivered a gear change in the system. New
statutory guidance in August 2024 set out an approach based on early, 'support first'
intervention - not late, reactive punishment. We have shared best practice with the
sector, driven by RISE, including through twelve regional conferences aimed at secondary
schools, two published toolkits for schools and local authorities and expert adviser
support to help local authorities strengthen attendance services.
We have delivered major upgrades to school and local authority level data including
an AI powered report that allows schools to benchmark their attendance levels against 20
schools in similar circumstances, and which gives them targeted recommendations for
improvement. From this academic year, Ofsted can access more timely and granular
attendance data, supporting higher quality inspection.
We are directly supporting schools to progress towards this ambition by providing each
school, through their AI reports, a personalised minimum annual improvement target
for overall attendance set on the basis of the performance of similar schools. This will be
used to help identify where attendance is not improving including against comparable
schools and will be used to identify schools in need of further support. Reports also
identify top comparable performers to help schools learn from each other.
Our approach is driving results, with children attending school for 5 million more days
in 2024/25:¹⁶⁹ the biggest improvement in over a decade. Attendance also improved for
children eligible for free school meals, 170 with the North East and South West starting to
catch up with the rest of the country. 171 We want to go further to help schools directly.
Removing barriers to attendance
We are clear that attendance is not optional: parents and carers play a critical role in
setting expectations and supporting children to attend, even where there are barriers or a
child is not keen to go. It is the responsibility of schools to help children feel engaged and
supported - ensuring that school is a place children want to attend and to work with
children, parents, local authorities and wider services to help tackle any barriers. Our
reform of the SEND system will ensure that schools are equipped to meet all children's
needs and support improved attendance.
To drive stronger engagement and ensure it translates into better outcomes, we are
rolling out RISE Attendance and Behaviour Hubs. Schools who join the hubs will have
access to a structured attendance and behaviour focussed training programme, as well
as opportunities to discuss and share effective practice at termly open days. 90 hub
schools will bring together regional networks with capacity to support more than 3,000
schools per year. Schools with the biggest challenges will receive intensive support to
develop and implement an attendance and behaviour improvement plan focussed on
effective systems, data and leadership. Over 500 schools with acute challenges will
receive intensive support from a lead school per year, working with them.
68
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Case study: Sharing best practice to improve attendance
Ninestiles, an Academy, attended the Breaking Down Barriers to Opportunity:
Transforming Attendance conference in March, where attendees were encouraged
to take a support first approach to absence, working in partnership with families.
One key step is a distributional approach to analysing absence data. This means
looking at all levels of absence, not just the lowest, to spot children that drop
through absence bands quickly, and identify trends so that help can be provided
earlier.
The best practice event offered Ninestiles the opportunity to take stock of their own
practice around attendance and apply learning in their own setting. Using the new
approach to data, they can target interventions to drive up attendance across the
whole school community. The school works intensively and early with feeder
primary schools to support children through the transition to secondary school.
They build relationships with children and families over the summer and offer
practical support with transport and uniform to remove barriers to attendance.
The school has reported that for the first half term for 2025, when comparing to
similar schools, their attendance position moved from 17th to 4th. The current year
7 attendance is the highest for any year 7 cohort since the pandemic.
The barriers to children's attendance and engagement in education can be complex and
require a joint effort across a wide range of services, working in partnership. We are
collaborating with our partners in health, housing, criminal justice, youth services and
local authorities to tackle the root causes and deep drivers of children falling through the
cracks, as set out in Chapter 1: Our children's futures.
Local authorities, as well as schools, play a critical role in supporting attendance. We
have been working across the country to strengthen school attendance support teams
and implement an approach based on 'support first, with most local authority teams now
meeting regularly with schools to agree individual plans for the most complex cases. We
will deploy our specialist attendance advisers to support and challenge local
authorities with high need, and those deploying innovative approaches. This will help
build the evidence base on what works, developing new strategies in tackling severe
absence and sharing this knowledge nationally. Additionally, severely absent children
without a social worker will routinely be assessed for Family Help through the Families
First Partnership programme. This means children and families who need it will be able
to access additional support, tailored to their needs.
We have also expanded our attendance mentoring programme with £15 million
investment to provide 10,000 more persistently absent children with one-to-one
support from a trained mentor to support them back into school. This expansion covers
an additional ten areas with some of the worst attendance rates in the country. The
programme is being independently evaluated, in conjunction with the Youth Endowment
Fund, to help us test, learn and grow the evidence base for interventions that are effective
at improving pupil attendance and engagement in education. We will ensure that
attendance is prioritised when children are considered for support through youth
programmes like the Prevention Partnerships and Young Futures Hubs.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
69
Reducing the impact of ill-health and medical appointments on
attendance
As well as illness, in 2023/24 around 4 million school days were lost to medical
appointments. 172 Through the 10 Year Health Plan, we are enhancing access to same
day digital or telephone consultations which will help reduce the need for parents to
take children out of school for medical appointments, and capitalise on the benefits of
Neighbourhood Health Services for children.
To improve attendance and as part of our ambition to make mainstream schools more
inclusive, we are working to enable schools to better accommodate children with
health conditions so they can be in school and are exploring how we can collect data
on health-related attendance to better understand where there may be opportunities for
further action. We will also work with the NHS to update the existing guidance for
parents to clarify expectations around medical appointments, helping to reduce lost
learning time.
We will explore how we can better utilise spaces within schools to allow children to
access health services without missing out on education, while also minimising
disruption for working parents.
We are also encouraging other local services to reiterate the importance of
attendance when they have regular contact with children. This includes GPs, nurses and
social workers facilitating conversations with children and their families to support regular
school attendance.
We will work with NHSE and DHSC to incorporate evidence-based conversations
about school attendance into the Making Every Contact Count approach,
making the most of every chance to support children to attend school regularly.
Supporting attendance for children affected by homelessness
Over half of school age children who are homeless have missed days of school because
of living in temporary accommodation. The government's national plan to end
homelessness seeks to end the unlawful use of B&Bs and prevent more households from
becoming homeless in the first place.
We will reduce the impact on attendance of children residing in temporary
accommodation by providing clearer guidance, alongside the Ministry of Housing,
Communities and Local Government, to ensure that continued school attendance is a
priority when securing accommodation. 173
Thanks to our world leading attendance data tools, schools, trusts and local authorities
can already track disadvantaged children's attendance in near real time. Building on this
existing data we will improve transparency on the number of school days lost for children
in temporary accommodation so that targeted support can be provided more effectively.
We will introduce a new duty on councils to notify schools, health visitors and GPs
that a child is in temporary accommodation. This will help improve partnership working
and ensure services are aware of the household's status, so they are able to provide
appropriate support.
70
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Calm and inclusive learning environments
Calm, caring and predictable environments are inclusive environments for all children,
including children with SEND. 174 But these conditions can only be achieved where
expectations and standards of behaviour are consistent and high. For too many children
this is still not their experience. We must go further to ensure all children, including
those with SEND, reap the benefits of a calm and inclusive environment.
The overall rise in behaviours leading to suspensions and permanent exclusions means
more children losing learning, more disruption to parents, and more teachers dealing
with issues that get in the way of teaching. The worrying trend of school staff reporting
abuse continues¹⁷⁶ - this is unacceptable as no one should experience physical abuse in
their workplace.
Addressing this will take concerted effort from schools and parents - working together
with clear roles and expectations. Many teachers, support staff and leaders already go
above and beyond to set high standards of behaviour for all children. We know that when
teaching staff have the tools, training and guidance to confidently create classrooms
which are places of ambition and aspiration coupled with warmth and belonging, all can
achieve and thrive. When parents reinforce these principles at home, it creates
consistency that strengthens children's sense of belonging and supports their success.
We will spread best practice, emphasising inclusion, through refreshed
behaviour resources including Behaviour in Schools guidance, statutory Suspension
and Permanent Exclusion guidance and a bespoke evidence-based toolkit for
teachers on behaviour and bullying.
We will deliver this alongside the new network of Attendance and Behaviour Hubs, and
this will strengthen early intervention and reinforce clear expectations around preventing
all forms of bullying. All schools will receive support to develop safe, inclusive cultures
with expectations for both attendance and behaviour. The Hub leads will also deliver a
schedule of termly, regional events including best practice sharing events and open days.
The expectation of high standards of behaviour should be the same for all children.
Inclusive schools consider how behaviour policies can best be designed and
implemented to maintain these high standards, but also identify and address the root
causes of individual behaviours, including where these might be associated with a child's
special educational needs and disabilities. This means understanding a child's needs
early and putting the right support in place.
We will work with partner organisations and the education sector to develop
more practical guidance on reasonable adjustments, with worked examples and
simple, actionable tools to embed inclusive practice confidently and consistently.
Many alternative provision and special schools have significant expertise in this area. We
will enable alternative provision and special schools to partner with local mainstream
schools through targeted outreach work to understand and address underlying behaviour
issues at both the individual and cohort level. Where children's needs are more complex,
they can also offer time-limited placements in their specialist environments to better
understand and address those needs.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
71
Case study: Managing behaviour inclusively in a specialist setting
Olive Academy Thurrock, an alternative provision school, underwent a cultural shift
in their approach to behaviour, in response to increasing numbers of students with
EHCPs or identified with complex needs, eligible for pupil premium, or with English
as an additional language. Their new approach focused on understanding the
causes of students' behaviour, alongside consistent expectations. This has created
a more supportive environment for growth, rather than a solely reactive one, whilst
maintaining a high standard of expected behaviour for all pupils, with an
understanding that certain behaviours are unacceptable.
Children are supported to reflect on their experiences, and the school emphasises
the need to repair harm, foster positive relationships and teach social and emotional
skills. Careful needs analysis at induction has led to the development of targeted
strategies and interventions. Collaboration with wider staff teams and families has
enabled an integrated approach to meeting children's needs. This was supported
with high-level staff training and practice.
Though these changes are new, they are already seeing results across the trust,
with the number of incidents leading to suspensions dropping from 34 to 13 and
cutting days lost to suspension from 70 to 22 during the first half-term of this
academic year, compared to last year. Mock examinations completed in the second
half-term demonstrated that improved behaviour and engagement had delivered a
positive impact on attainment. The school report that 70% of students achieve
English and maths GCSEs, double the 35% who achieved this benchmark
nationally in alternate provision in 2025. The school continues to monitor and refine
behaviour management strategies to maintain low suspension rates and is working
to assess the impact on student outcomes, especially those with additional needs.
We have introduced stronger guidance for schools to become mobile phone-free
environments. Our network of Attendance and Behaviour Hubs will support schools to
implement and enforce mobile phone policies, so that children can focus on learning and
engaging with their friends and peers.
Overall, our updated guidance and resources will encourage schools to give equal
consideration to developing rewards and recognition systems alongside sanctions.
Well-designed rules, routines, and rewards contribute to a positive and productive
learning environment, which in turn benefits children's sense of self and ultimately their
attendance, behaviour and learning. 177
Partnering with families to drive improvements in behaviour
Teachers and school leaders play a vital role in achieving the best outcomes for children -
but they cannot do it alone. Families are central to success, making them critical
partners in reinforcing expectations and supporting a positive school culture - with the
vast majority of parents agreeing that they share responsibility for their child's behaviour
at school. 178 Families and schools must feel they share the responsibility for all aspects of
a child's education and school experience.
72
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
We will reinforce the expectation that families are actively engaged in their child's
education. We will explore how schools can use meaningful, documented agreements
with families, which will set out clear expectations for both parents and pupils, and what
they can expect in return from the school. This will help to build a culture of shared
responsibility and accountability across multiple areas of school life, including behaviour.
We will introduce Reintegration Support Partnerships, which will involve a formal
meeting following a suspension leading to an agreed plan and responsibilities.
This will ensure parents are playing their part in their child's reflection and reintegration
following a suspension. Schools that already do this well use these meetings to bring
together schools, families, and relevant parties to co-develop strategies focused on
collective responsibility for early intervention and behaviour improvement. We will
consult on a proposed model and provide supporting good practice resources and case
studies as part of the refreshed statutory Suspension and Permanent Exclusion guidance.
This is different and in addition to the local authority led planning for reintegration as part
of SEND transition planning, set out in SEND Reform: Putting Children and Young People
First.
Case study: Effective parental engagement to improve pupil
behaviour
Dixons Cottingley Academy aim to deliver high standards of behaviour through
setting strong expectations not just for students, but for parents too, and view
families as essential partners in creating a culture of high expectations and
sustained success.
The school has embodied the trust's strategic approach to parental engagement by
securing genuine buy-in from parents. The school has shifted efforts from
bureaucratic tasks such as traditional report writing, to place greater emphasis on
high-frequency, meaningful dialogue. Their Family Handbook ensures parents are
equipped with knowledge on the curriculum, expectations around homework,
uniform, attendance and the school's approach to regular communication. By
sharing this information at the outset and updating it throughout the child's time in
school, the school can gain buy-in from parents and a belief that their approach will
benefit pupils in the long term, both in and out of school.
The school also ensures that regular contact with parents covers positive
messaging, rather than only reaching out when things go wrong. This is supported
by a Home-Academy agreement, which summarises and sets out the key
expectations for all staff, parents and pupils. This demonstrates a shared purpose
and allows all parties to hold each other to account where required. Both progress
and attainment have continued to rise year-on-year, and the school reports more
parents choosing to send their children to their school.
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
73
Supporting excluded pupils
We want children to be in school and in lessons whenever possible. Suspensions
are serious sanctions. They provide a clear signal of what is unacceptable behaviour
and should be used as an opportunity to recognise, reflect on and address those issues.
We trust leaders to use suspensions and permanent exclusions where they judge them
necessary to support all children's engagement in school. High expectations of behaviour
and early intervention to understand root causes should enable children to engage and
participate at school, reducing disruptive behaviour.
Exclusions have consequences and should only be used appropriately and in line
with the government guidance. It would be unlawful for example, to exclude a pupil
simply because they have SEND that the school feels it is unable to meet. Violence has
no place in our schools. We trust headteachers to use sanctions appropriately, in line with
guidance and their professional judgement recognising the circumstances of individual
pupils when deciding on exclusions. In December 2025, we published updated guidance
on restrictive interventions, including reasonable force and seclusion. It sets clear
expectations to help keep children and staff safe.
Many schools use forms of internal suspension as part of their behaviour policies, where
children are removed from the classroom for a period of time. Suspensions, as set out in
law, require a child to be temporarily removed from the school. While this might be
appropriate in many cases, we also know that for some children being sent home could
mean that they are left unsupervised and disengaged. 179
We will equip schools with the flexibility, following consultation and updated
guidance, to suspend children while requiring them to complete their sanction
on site in a supervised environment.
To minimise disruption to learning and avoid time-consuming catch up, we will consult
and introduce a duty that schoolwork is set for excluded children to mitigate and
recover lost learning while managing teacher capacity.
We have committed to introduce a new framework to give schools clear guidance on
when internal suspensions are appropriate and how to structure them effectively. Children
will complete the work they would otherwise have missed, ensuring their education can
continue and easing the burden on teacher time, which would otherwise be spent
covering lost learning. Children will remain in a supervised school environment and
receive support to understand the causes of their misbehaviour. For example, they may
be supported to reflect on their actions, take responsibility, and develop emotional
regulation skills. To help schools review their sanctions systems, we will provide schools
with timely data on suspensions and permanent exclusions.
This will allow them to review their outcomes against similar schools. We will work with
schools to help them understand their data and where required, offer targeted support
and intervention, which includes signposting and sharing best practice to ensure schools
are using exclusions effectively.
It is crucial to identify points of disruption in a child's journey through school, particularly
looking at absence together with suspension and permanent exclusion. For example,
evidence shows there may be differences between ethnic groups in their experience of
74
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
suspensions and permanent exclusions, in particular pupils from the Gypsy/Roma,
Traveller of Irish Heritage, White and Black Caribbean, and Black Caribbean ethnic
groups. 180
The Race Equality Unit will work with key stakeholder groups to interrogate the
evidence on what drives disparities in school exclusions between different ethnic
groups.
This will help to inform more robust policy to improve children's experience of the
education system and their subsequent outcomes, better preparing them for the transition
into the labour market.
Case study: A proactive approach to prevent permanent exclusion
Perryfields is a Primary alternative provision school in South Worcestershire that
takes a proactive approach in preventing permanent exclusion from mainstream
schools, rather than only focusing on reactive provision for pupils following
exclusion. They focus on finding each child's 'forever school' and reintegrating
pupils into the mainstream wherever possible. Their most recent Ofsted inspection
report highlights that Perryfields is 'an intervention not a destination'.
The school also provides preventative outreach support to over 300 pupils each
year across mainstream schools, which includes training sessions and support for
staff. Their 'Perryfields Intervention Programme (PIP)' is a six-week part-time
placement, where pupils spend the morning in the programme and return to their
mainstream school in the afternoon. Full time provision is made for permanently
excluded pupils, until they can return to mainstream or allocated a Special School
place. Each year an average of 85% of pupils who ever set foot in Perryfields
successfully return to and maintain their mainstream placement.
Supporting children as they move between schools
Children move between schools for many reasons, such as getting more support from
other schools or to move into and out of alternative provision. But the rules for these
moves - particularly short-term placements - are not always clear or applied consistently.
In some cases, children are not successfully supported to return to mainstream schools.
To address this, we will explore how we can make processes clearer and more
consistent for all schools, including how pupils access inclusion bases within
mainstream schools. We will strengthen expectations and processes for reintegrating
pupils from alternative provision back into mainstream and set clear expectations for
governing bodies and trust boards to keep track of pupil numbers.
When children move between schools, parents expect clear rules and strong oversight
to make sure their child's education continues smoothly and that they stay included in
learning. But this is not always happening.¹⁸¹ Pupil movements between different types of
education settings are not monitored well, and the law is unclear in some areas, especially
when children move into or out of alternative provision.¹⁸²
Part 1: Setting every child up to succeed
75
Because of this lack of visibility, vulnerable children, including those with SEND, can
miss out on education or end up with support that does not meet their needs. This
lack of visibility puts vulnerable children, including those with SEND, at risk of missing
education or receiving provision that does not meet their needs. Making these moves
work well is a responsibility shared across the whole system as we move towards a more
inclusive mainstream system. We will work with schools to make sure transitions are
managed in the best interests of each child.
We will strengthen scrutiny of all pupil movement including unacceptable off-
rolling practice by developing a new, internal dashboard that identifies school level
trends in how children move through the education system.
Using the dashboard, we will take a curious approach to identify patterns in pupil
movement that could suggest off-rolling or other concerning practices, including off-site
direction and managed moves, and will follow up on a targeted basis with responsible
bodies to understand and challenge where there are possible concerns. We will pay
particular attention to schools where SEND, FSM or demographic trends appear
significantly out of sync with their local context.
Off-rolling is unacceptable in any form, and we have strong enforcement arrangements
where this is confirmed to be happening. We will work to share better more timely data
on pupil movement with Ofsted to strengthen its ability to identify poor practice.
Where inspectors find evidence of bad practice, it will be reflected in the school's report
card and the leadership and governance evaluation will likely be graded 'urgent
improvement' - which in turn would normally lead to intervention.
Using insight from Ofsted and our regional offices, alongside the data dashboard, we will
conduct an annual review that tracks how children move through the education
system. This internal review will look at how offsite direction is used, how managed
moves are carried out, and why children are leaving their school, including evidence on
whether off-rolling is taking place.
76
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver
change
To achieve the three shifts outlined in Part 1 of this white paper - rebuilding our public
services around schools and setting every child up to succeed in and beyond school - we
must reform our education system to provide stronger foundations for excellence.
These foundations - of great teachers and leaders, of schools working collaboratively to
be anchor institutions in their communities, and of an innovative, self-improving system
- will help us to deliver transformational change and high standards for every child.
Chapter 5: Support and investment in high-quality
staff
Vision
No education system can be better than the quality of its staff and, in England, we have
some of the best and most dedicated staff working throughout education. We want to
pay tribute to their incredible work and their tireless endeavours to support children and
young people. Our goal is to move to a new model of supporting and enabling excellence
within the system through innovation and working in genuine partnership with leaders,
teachers and support staff. That includes investing in their professional development,
respecting their expertise and autonomy as professionals. We are also addressing the
reasons why many leave the profession, including tackling workload pressures created by
high rates of child poverty and a lack of services for children and families around schools.
Every child should have expert teachers, leaders and support staff who deliver an
enriching education and who set and embody the culture in which all children achieve and
thrive. This chapter outlines how we will support, empower and invest in expert
leaders, teachers and support staff in every school.
Case for change
Great teaching is the most important lever schools have for improving children's
attainment, especially for those whose needs have been sidelined for too long -
disadvantaged children, 183 those with SEND, 184 and every child who could be pushed
further to succeed. Too many teachers report that they lack the confidence to meet the
needs of pupils with SEND, 185 and teaching children with SEND is the area most
commonly mentioned by teachers for further training or development. 186
Not all children are benefitting from experienced teachers: only around two thirds of
teachers are still in service five years after qualifying, 187 and many schools struggle to
recruit and retain enough teachers. These recruitment and retention challenges are
pronounced in certain subjects, including STEM. 188,189 Children are missing out on the
deep expertise of subject experts, with too many hours taught by non-specialist
teachers. 190 The gaps in access to high-quality teaching do not fall equally. Schools with
higher proportions of disadvantaged children have a greater proportion of unqualified
teachers, teachers with 5 years or less experience and higher teacher turnover rates. 191
We must and will do more to address these issues - and ensure all children have access
to high-quality teaching.
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
77
To improve the school experience for all children, we need the very best school leaders
where they are needed most. Leaders want to spend their time focusing on children but
are too often hampered from doing so. In 2025, around half of senior leaders said they
spent too much time on administration within their school and around three in ten
teachers and leaders said they were considering leaving the state-funded school sector in
the next 12 months; most cited stress and/or poor wellbeing and high workload as
important factors. 192 Schools with the highest proportion of children from disadvantaged
backgrounds have the highest leaving rates of headteachers. 193 These schools are the
ones that would most benefit from experienced, effective, leadership.
An expert teacher in every classroom
As a first step to securing the expert teaching that every child needs, we are recruiting
6,500 more teachers. As we set out in our new 6,500 teachers delivery plan, published
alongside this white paper, we will work with the sector to drive recruitment and retention
across three key themes.
Key themes of our 6,500 teachers delivery plan:
1. Attract: optimising routes into teaching,
2. Retain: improving teaching experience and boosting retention, and
3. Develop: expanding career-long development opportunities.
We will target shortage subjects, areas that face recruitment challenges, and retention
issues. We are recruiting these teachers where the need is greatest - across our
secondary and special schools and FE colleges, where pupil numbers will continue to
grow and remain high this Parliament. We have seen good initial progress with over 2,300
more teachers across secondary and special schools in 2024/25, 194 and 1,150 more new
postgraduate trainees in STEM subjects in 2025/26 compared to the previous year. 195 This
means that the STEM ITT target has been met for the first time since its introduction. 196
We are already retaining more of our teachers: the leaver rate has fallen to 9%, the lowest
since reporting began in 2010, other than during the COVID pandemic. 197 In a challenging
fiscal context, we have already acted quickly to improve the pay of teachers,
accepting the School Teachers' Review Body (STRB) recommendations for an almost
10% pay award over the last two years and investing £233 million in teacher recruitment
for 2025/26. To help promote supportive wellbeing cultures, over 4,200 schools and
colleges have already signed up to the Education Staff Wellbeing Charter. We are also
providing tools and resources to reduce workload and improve wellbeing, developed by
school leaders for school leaders, through the 'Improve Workload and Wellbeing for
School Staff' service.
In order to recruit and retain the expert workforce our children need, we will continue our
work to reform statutory pay and conditions for teachers and leaders, and will
remove the ceiling on pay, giving leaders more flexibility to innovate in what they offer
their teachers.
We will also go further to address the pressures that staff face.
78
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
We are investing in a new teacher retention programme from Autumn 2026.
This new initiative will build on our flexible working programme, to share best practice
across the sector and provide peer support, coaching and resources. This will help
schools learn from each other on managing workloads and expanding flexible working,
whilst protecting teaching time so that experienced teachers stay and thrive.
Assaults on school staff are rare but rising,¹⁹⁸ and totally unacceptable.
We will work with the sector to make clear that abuse against teachers will not be
tolerated, and to improve reporting of incidents.
We will work with the sector to support them to ensure more thorough and consistent
reporting of incidents so that we can assess the scale of the issue and consider the case
for national monitoring or other further action. We will provide new guidance to schools,
trusts and local authorities so that staff are better supported where cases of bullying and
harassment do take place.
We will help teachers harness AI, including Oak's lesson assistant 'Aila', in ways that
amplify their impact, streamline their workload, and preserve their irreplaceable role in
shaping learning, as covered in further detail in Chapter 7: Enabling innovation and
ambition.
Case Study: EEF - Designing a modern school workforce
The Education Endowment Foundation has been evaluating the impact of flexible
working, with a 2023 review finding that while more research is needed in this area,
flexible working could have the potential to support recruitment, retention and
workforce stability. 199 Challenges to implementing flexible working include potential
additional costs and timetabling constraints, but successful flexible working that
protects teaching time can be enabled by schools taking a whole-school, proactive
approach through effective communication, clear and accessible policies and
access to training, tools and guidance.
One example of flexible working is a 9-day fortnight for teachers by Dixons
Academies Trust. Before it was introduced, Dixons took steps to systematically
reduce teacher workload, especially around planning, marking and meetings. The
EEF is evaluating the 9-day fortnight and found that delivering the change involved
introducing or retaining a fortnightly timetable, increasing specialist teaching at
primary level, and flexing some class sizes at secondary. 200 Most teachers reported
improved teacher wellbeing, morale, and work-life balance, with no negative impact
on children, including those with SEND - the next step in the project will test this
robustly. Early signs of stronger recruitment and retention were also noted by some
school leaders. The 9-day fortnight was a deliberate challenge to the status quo,
aimed at giving teachers more control over their time, rather than reducing hours,
without impacting teaching hours for children.
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
79
We lose too many female leaders, teachers and support staff from the profession. Women
aged 30-39 are the largest group of leavers from the teacher workforce. 201 Maternity pay
for staff in education has not kept up with other professions. Therefore, we are taking a
first step to address the comparatively low level of maternity pay relative to other parts of
the public sector:
We will fund schools to improve maternity pay, doubling the period of full pay from
the current offer of 4 weeks to 8 weeks for school teachers and leaders from the
2027/28 academic year.
Alongside this, we will provide funding for school support staff and will remit the new
School Support Staff Negotiating Body (SSSNB) to negotiate an equivalent improvement
to maternity pay for support staff in its first year of operation. We will also provide
commensurate funding so that colleges can enhance the maternity offer for their staff.
Furthermore, we will improve the offer for mothers by improving flexibilities on their
return to work after maternity leave. For example, we are taking action to promote and
expand flexible working opportunities in schools - our funded flexible working programme
offers practical support, including on how flexible working can be navigated alongside
career progression. We have worked with school leaders to develop new resources on the
'Improve Workload and Wellbeing for School Staff' site on supporting women's health and
wellbeing.
More broadly, we are working to make teaching more inclusive, so schools and colleges
can attract and retain great teachers from all backgrounds as part of our efforts to recruit
6,500 more teachers. We are trialling fully anonymised profiles for some initial teacher
training candidates; working to improve how we collect data on ethnicity and
disability in schools so that we can better monitor and address disparities; developing
new resources to support leaders to build inclusive environments and reviewing
NPQ training to help more teachers from underrepresented groups step into senior
roles. The Race Equality Unit will also undertake research to explore effective
mechanisms to improve recruitment, retention and progression of the ethnic minority
teaching workforce.
A valued and recognised support staff workforce
Support staff play a variety of roles in our schools, including in specialist roles such as
managing behaviour and attendance, providing pastoral, teaching and learning support
and critical roles in managing school estates. Teaching assistants are valued by school
leaders for their positive impact on pupil behaviour, engagement and academic
progress. 202 Recognising the vital role support staff play in the operation of schools and
young people's education, and to help recruit and retain the support staff we need, we will
launch the new School Support Staff Negotiating Body (SSSNB). This body will enable
bespoke negotiation on pay, including improvements to maternity pay referenced above,
and terms and conditions to ensure that staff are recognised and rewarded for the work
they do, as well as advise on suitable training and career progression routes for the varied
roles support staff undertake. Support staff will benefit from our new training package
on inclusion and we will continue to fund and promote research into how schools
deploy their support staff in evidence-based ways to deliver the best outcomes for
children.
80
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
We will expand the training and development opportunities available to school
business professionals, including the introduction of a Regional In-Person Training Offer.
We will also continue with our Level 7 School Financial and Operational Leadership
qualification bursary programme and introduce a new bursary for the Level 4 Diploma in
School Business Management. These initiatives will help equip chief financial officers and
school business managers with the knowledge, skills and tools they need to support their
headteacher to drive best value.
Case study: Using teaching assistants flexibly to support children
Our Lady Queen of Heaven Catholic Primary School worked with a School
Improvement Advisor (SIA), who supported them to apply the Education
Endowment Foundation (EEF) guidance and research on the deployment of TAs. 203
As a result, TAs are now deployed across the year group, instead of always working
with the same children. In the morning, they focus on supporting teaching in the
classroom, and in the afternoon, they deliver a range of interventions, such as
speech and language or literacy interventions. TAs receive appropriate training,
including from an educational psychologist, the SENCO, and speech and language
therapists, allowing them to upskill and gain confidence.
The school has high levels of achievement: 85% of children meet the expected
standard in reading, writing and maths, compared to the Local Authority average
of 60%.
Transforming career-long development opportunities
High-quality teaching is at the foundation of achieving the best outcomes for all children.
It relies on the professional expertise of our leaders, teachers, and support staff who are
not only specialists in their field, but also in delivering an enriching education for all their
children, particularly those whose needs have been sidelined for too long. It is only by
working in genuine partnership that we will achieve our collective ambition for children.
We must build on the significant progress in recent years in putting evidenced
pedagogical approaches and high-quality Continuous Professional Development (CPD) at
the heart of education. We will invest in the profession and ensure that training reflects
the current challenges that our schools face. School staff want to feel empowered and
confident to meet the needs of all children, but too many are not yet getting this
support. 204,205
We will improve professional development for staff at all points in their career
and invest in training to ensure that teachers can identify and meet a broader range
of needs, including the needs of children with SEND.
This includes our plans to equip the workforce with the skills, knowledge and confidence
to meet a wider range of needs through evidence-based training in high-quality inclusive
and adaptive teaching, which is set out in Chapter 3: Sidelined to included. Our plans also
include delivering our commitment to ensuring that new teachers have or are working
towards achieving Qualified Teacher Status, which will help ensure an expert teacher
for every child.
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
81
We are also bringing forward our offer of a new Teacher Training Entitlement (TTE), to
ensure that every teacher and leader can access high-quality professional development
opportunities to keep learning and developing. The TTE will evolve over time to ensure
teachers continue to be supported to adopt evidence-based approaches, including in
areas such as the use of technology and AI to support learning. This includes
strengthening the existing national offer of professional development, extending the offer
to reach new audiences such as experienced teachers and leaders, work to ensure
development opportunities are clear and accessible, and support for schools to develop
strong development cultures. The Post-16 Education and Skills White Paper sets out that
we will also establish a professional development pathway for teachers in further
education.
The Teacher Training Entitlement (TTE)
In schools, the TTE focuses on four strategic priorities for professional development:
1. Strengthening the existing national offer of professional development. An
improved Early Career Teacher Entitlement (ECTE) was implemented this year,
and will be reviewed again in 2027. National Professional Qualifications (NPQs)
will be reformed to better reflect the training needs of today, including
supporting children with SEND and people leadership skills.
2. Extend the national offer so there is training at every stage by introducing
new professional development programmes for experienced teachers and
leaders. We will develop new models of CPD programmes that complement the
ECTE and NPQs. This will start with:
From September 2026, a new training package of over £200 million over
three years will be available to all staff working across early years, schools
and post-16 settings to support staff in building inclusive environments.
New training for reception classroom teachers to help ensure every child
gets the best possible foundation in their first year of school.
3. Ensuring development opportunities are clear and accessible to all
teachers and leaders. Our first steps will involve working through the Universal
RISE programme (including Teaching School Hubs) to ensure all schools know
how to access high-quality professional development within their communities
- as well as bringing schools together to share knowledge and innovation.
4. Supporting strong development cultures in schools and trusts, including by
supporting and better promoting research on what makes effective CPD and
how it can be implemented, and ensuring NPQs reflect this.
82
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Case study: Investing in teacher development to improve outcomes
for children
Greater Manchester Education Trust (GMET) consists of 5 schools in Greater
Manchester, with a high level of disadvantage: 53% of children at the end of Key
Stage 4 are eligible for the Pupil Premium compared to the average of 28.2%.
GMET has embedded national CPD programmes for early career teachers and
NPQs for teachers across the trust. Engagement with NPQs has more than doubled
in the last two years. For example, leaders are encouraged to engage in NPQs as
participants and facilitators. They complement the Early Career Teacher Entitlement,
available to all early career teachers, with Trust specific induction materials leading
to 100% satisfaction with the programme. Teachers also continue to build subject
expertise through their career through learning communities overseen by subject
leads with staff feedback showing they value opportunities to learn from colleagues
and are implementing tangible improvements to their practice.
They collaborate with others beyond the school through grassroots networks such
as the Trust-Wide CPD Leaders' Forum, a free professional learning community that
brings together CPD leaders from over 250 trusts. Since embedding this approach,
the Trust achieves outcomes above national average scores for progress and
attainment across their schools, and they report that their holistic approach to CPD
has improved staff retention and engagement.
Excellence in leadership
Headteachers and leaders are central to everything that happens in schools. They set the
culture and ethos in which school staff work together to ensure that all children can
achieve and thrive. The trust and respect with which headteachers are held reflects the
depth of experience, knowledge and commitment required to lead a school effectively.
The professional expertise to deliver an excellent education for every child already
exists within our school system. By working in genuine partnership, sharing this best
practice and fostering collaboration among leaders, we strengthen not only individual
schools but the collective capacity of the school system to deliver the highest standards
for every child.
Our approach to spreading best practice and sharing learning is insufficient, and barriers
and bureaucracy get in the way of leaders who are trying to do the right thing. We will set
clear expectations and empower leaders with training and support to deliver for all
children, particularly the most disadvantaged. We will invest in leaders and give them the
agency to innovate and instil positive cultures that prioritise teacher development,
building trust and improving working conditions so that more high-quality teachers and
leaders want to stay in the profession. We recognise school headships as a high-
performance leadership role.
We will deliver a targeted package of interventions for Excellence in Leadership
that update standards, strengthen professional development and support wellbeing.
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
83
Supporting excellence in leadership
Our targeted package of interventions will include:
Investing an additional £500,000 each year in a reformed and improved early
headship coaching offer, reaching approximately a further 500 headteachers,
particularly in disadvantaged areas.
Establishing a new offer for heads to access support from mentors and
each other in support networks, including a new framework of evidence on
mentoring for school leaders, and supporting local mentoring connections.
Investing £1m additional funding each year for wellbeing support, providing up
to 2,500 leaders annually with a safe and confidential space to develop new
strategies to manage their resilience and capacity to thrive in their role.
Ensuring the Headteachers' Standards reflect key expectations for high-
quality leadership, working with transformative employers, school leaders and
experts across different sectors to capture and share examples of outstanding
leadership, to support all headteachers to deliver best practice.
Piloting a new place-based Headteacher Retention Incentive, to attract and
support new headteachers to stay in the areas that need them most. In
recognition of the acute challenges in certain parts of the country, we will invest
£1m each year starting next year to support newly appointed headteachers with
an annual retention payment of up to £15,000 (before tax).
We know that leaders will need to make careful planning decisions as they work within
tight budgets to deliver reform and improvement and will need to plan how to deploy their
workforce, curriculum and resources to help every child achieve and thrive. The variation
in approaches taken by schools suggests there are opportunities for best practice and
exploration. Themes include innovating with new models of teaching, refining leadership
team structures, refining support staff deployment to maximise impact on learning and
development, and maximising the use of technology and AI in support of the workforce. 206
Many schools are already taking action to maximise their resources for high-quality
teaching.²⁰⁷
We are working with leaders to tackle systemic issues and help them to go further, as part
of the new Maximising Value for Pupils programme. That includes publishing a toolkit of
research and resources like case studies to help leaders learn from their peers and
continuing to update the Financial Benchmarking and Insights (FBIT) tool to help leaders
look deeply at their data, including similar school comparisons.
We will also support teachers, leaders and support staff to maximise the use of
technology and AI, both to tackle staff workload and to enable them to deliver the best
for the children in their classrooms every day, as set out in Chapter 7: Enabling innovation
and ambition.
We are making it easier to find deals on commercial needs through services like
Get Help Buying for Schools, our Teaching Vacancies Service and the Energy for Schools
Service. We are also cracking down on unacceptable practices within the teacher
supply market, to help reduce school spend on agency supply teachers. Schools will be
84
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
expected to use the government's new agency supply deal - delivered through the new
Crown Commercial Service framework launching in 2026 - unless they are able to achieve
better value for money elsewhere.
Leaders need safe, well maintained school buildings that provide high-quality learning
environments for all children. Historical under-investment, and a lack of strategic
planning, has undermined this.
We will, for the first time, provide long-term maintenance budgets for schools
and colleges, as recommended by the National Audit Office (NAO).
To improve the condition of schools and colleges across England, we have given a long-
term commitment for capital investment through to 2034-35. We will invest almost £3
billion per year by 2034-35 in capital maintenance and renewal, rising from £2.4 billion in
2025 to 2026. On top of this, through the School Rebuilding Programme, we will invest
almost £20 billion from 2025-26 to 2034-35 to deliver rebuilding projects at over 500
schools across England within the existing programme, as well as expand rebuilding, with
250 additional schools to be selected within two years. This is in addition to the £3.7
billion we're investing between 25-26 and 29-30 to create new specialist places, including
adapting mainstream schools to create more inclusive environments.
Finally, we know that the volume and complexity of guidance issued to schools has grown
significantly over time, requiring them to navigate substantial and often fragmented
information. The final chapter of this white paper, Implementation: Delivering our ambition
for every child, sets out how we will work with school leaders and representative groups
to streamline and improve the usability of all guidance for schools.
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
85
Chapter 6: Collaboration between schools and with
other partners
Vision
Enabling every child to achieve and thrive cannot be achieved by individual schools
acting alone. Collaboration between schools and across local communities, supported by
rebuilt public services around schools, is key to improving outcomes for children and
families.
Our best school trusts illustrate the transformational potential of schools working together
for children. By sharing resources and best practice, and through strong governance, they
have shown that they are more resilient, can meet children's needs and deliver the highest
quality education in partnership. We will put collaboration at the heart of the system
by moving to all schools joining or forming high-quality school trusts, including
enabling new local authority established trusts. This is an opportunity for schools to
come together in new partnerships to take on challenges and bring further innovation to
the system.
Recognising the pivotal role of local authorities in safeguarding, supporting, and
promoting the welfare of all children in their area, we will strengthen and clarify how
local authorities and school trusts should work together, building on best practice
from existing place-based partnerships.
Case for change
Collaboration is not an end goal in itself. It is a means of achieving higher standards,
stronger professional practice, and better outcomes for children. Better collaboration
between schools lies at the heart of providing all children with the best our system
has to offer. Our diverse system has resulted in collaborative groups of schools in both
the academy and maintained sectors, including groups established with the purpose of
driving school improvement. However, our current system is fragmented which leaves
some schools missing out on opportunities for improvement and sharing best practice.
Standalone schools can chart their own path but can also face serious challenges: of the
55 academy trusts in cumulative deficit as of August 2023, 40 were single-school
trusts. 208 Our challenge to our best standalone schools is to partner with others through a
school trust, so that they can spread their excellence more widely.
Chapter 1: Our children's futures includes several examples of the need to strengthen
local partnership in a system where duties and responsibilities are dispersed between
different services. For too long, roles and responsibilities have been unclear, and
partnership seen as optional rather than essential. Greater clarity and responsibility within
partnerships can unlock better outcomes for children.
Collaboration in high-quality school trusts
Our best school trusts use their scale, governance and high-quality leadership to
innovate and drive excellence in standards and inclusion. They can, for instance, bring
to life a high-quality curriculum for every child by sharing expertise and resources, and
deploy teachers where they are most needed, including to benefit more disadvantaged
children,209 an approach made easier by operating at scale. Over time, the performance of
86
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
secondary schools that have joined trusts has tended to improve. 210 Resources can be
better shared and joint initiatives better implemented, minimising duplication and
optimising expenditure. High-quality trusts, rooted in their community, are also well-
positioned to collaborate with other schools, local government and health partners, to
tackle challenges that extend beyond the school gate to deliver for all children in their
area, including those with SEND. We welcome innovative trusts taking steps to meet
the aspirations set out in this white paper, from embedding inclusion to tackling the
attainment gap.
Over the last year, we have taken steps to ensure that all parents can have confidence
in the core of their child's learning with a national curriculum applying equally in both
academies and maintained schools. We have started to spread the flexibility that
academies have, for example to operate flexible working arrangements, to maintained
schools so there is no ceiling on innovation.
We will now go further to enable all schools to access the benefits of collaboration in
a structured way and ensure that all children can learn in schools which combine active
collaboration with strong community ties. We want to harness the benefits of school
trusts, backed by shared governance and accountability, with a leadership structure
responsible for all children and their outcomes, to deliver more powerful collaboration.
We will put collaboration at the heart of the system by moving to all schools
joining or forming high-quality school trusts.
We will create the ability for school trusts to be established by local authorities
and local area partnerships so that schools are supported to deliver for all children.
We will work with the sector, prioritising quality over pace, to deliver a system truly built
for all children. We know each area has a different school landscape and all local
partners (local authorities, religious bodies, schools and trusts) need to work together to
build the school landscape that is right for their area. There will be different ways of
achieving this - for example, trusts with a national footprint could achieve coherence
through local hubs or clusters. Trusts should be large enough to optimise benefits in
terms of driving pupil progress, 211 estates planning and financial resilience, 212 although a
degree of flexibility on size is needed to reflect the different characteristics of local school
landscapes.
We will update our commissioning guidance to reflect our priorities of quality and
geographical coherence. We will also set out further detail on how we will work with local
partners to build a vibrant landscape of coherent high-quality, innovative trusts across
each area. As part of this process, we will welcome dialogue with school trusts about
whether the interests of children in isolated trust schools might be better served within a
more geographically coherent school trust.
School trusts created by local authorities will deepen collaborative partnerships that
have developed in the maintained sector by bringing them into the shared governance
and accountability structure of a trust. We know that there is excellent school
improvement work already being delivered in many parts of the country, including through
school companies and other forms of partnership, and want to see these grow and
flourish through the school trust system.
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
87
We will implement safeguards to manage potential conflicts of interest, both within trusts
and local authorities, including restrictions on the local authority's involvement in the
day-to-day running of a trust. These school trusts will be subject to the same regulatory
framework as all other trusts. We will set out arrangements for applications alongside
updated commissioning guidance.
High-quality trusts must be rooted in their communities to play their part as civic
institutions. We will expect all school trusts to look outwards with purpose, to share
expertise, and support others to improve. This includes embedding collaboration into
the standards we require of trusts, with a pillar focused on community collaboration in
the new Trust Standards (covered further below). We will encourage school trusts to
report on how they have supported stronger outcomes in their community role through
annual public benefit reporting. Once established, we will hold school trusts to account
for this role through trust inspection.
The most effective trusts combine a commitment to supporting and improving their
schools with a responsibility to the wider education system, acting as civic institutions
that partner with schools, local authorities, faith groups, and wider public services; and
supporting other trusts to drive improvement. By collaborating across boundaries and
sharing excellence, they ensure that all children benefit. We will hold every trust to the
high standard that many already exemplify.
We will consult on requiring school trusts to have local governance structures that
together include all their schools, hold annual parental forums, and ensure
boards hear directly from parents and school communities.
The consultation will draw on the strongest sector practice in engaging parents and
communities, to ensure that trust boards benefit from clear, consistent insight into the
needs and priorities of the families they serve.
We will work with the sector to update co-operative academy school trust model
articles of association, so this model can effectively support purposeful, large-scale
collaboration.
Trust Standards to strengthen accountability
It is right that our accountability arrangements for school trusts reflect the large and
growing role that they have in the school system. We know that there are excellent school
trusts and want all school trusts to be as strong as they can be. We will drive up quality
by setting clear and demanding standards, holding to account, recognising and
celebrating where quality is high, and intervening when necessary. We will refine our
approach through a continuing programme of engagement with stakeholders.
We will set demanding expectations for all school trusts, through new Trust
Standards.
We will create new Trust Standards by overhauling the school trust quality descriptions to
reflect the vision set out in this white paper. We will build on the current pillars to
emphasise the importance of standards, inclusion, value for money and contributing
willingly to community collaboration. 213 The Trust Standards will draw on the most
transformational sector practice: sharing excellence, spreading innovation, and lifting
outcomes across communities.
88
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
We have already announced our plans to introduce trust inspections, via the Children's
Wellbeing and Schools Bill. Trust inspection will make the system fairer and more
transparent, and in doing so help to drive quality throughout the system. It will support
trusts to improve themselves by identifying areas of strength and weakness. It will shine a
light on trusts that lead with purpose, take a wider system role, and extend the original
academies' spirit of collaboration and innovation. The focus of inspection will be on
assessing quality, rather than checking for compliance and it will consider the efficacy of
a trust's activity, rather than prescribing particular approaches.
We will work closely with the sector, and with Ofsted, on the details of how the new
inspection arrangements will operate. Our programme of engagement with the sector will
include a period of formal consultation, and Ofsted will also be testing and piloting
inspection approaches, and consulting on its draft framework. Ofsted will build its
expertise in this area, including by recruiting from the sector and there will be extensive
stakeholder engagement before and through implementation. Our ambition is that when
trust inspection is established, and more schools join trusts, we will be able to reduce
the burden of school-level inspection.
To ensure high standards for all, we will intervene where standards are not met
in an inspection.
We have also announced our plans for legislation, via the Children's Wellbeing and
Schools Bill, to enable the transfer of one or more of an underperforming trust's schools.
This will accelerate improvement across the system, with transformational results for
children, by ensuring that schools can be moved from low-performing trusts into suitable
and high-performing trusts. We will also explore using existing provisions to require an
underperforming trust to strengthen its governance or engage with external support.
We want every trust to make the most of its collective strength. Pooling resources
effectively can unlock innovation and maximise value for pupils. We will improve
arrangements for transparency where resources are being pooled and illustrate
where this is being done effectively. By shining a light on great practice and improving
transparency for parents and communities, we can support more trusts to operate with
the confidence and clarity that characterises the strongest sector practice.
We are also clear that the pay of trust chief executives must be justifiable,
transparent, evidence-based and reflect individual responsibility. Trustees should
adhere to these principles in setting pay, supported by our guidance and advice.
However, in some cases, their decisions have led to the agreement of high salaries,
compared to peers. We will tighten the academy trust handbook by requiring executive
pay increases to be proportionate and justified, to prevent excessive increases for
individuals carrying out broadly similar roles.
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
89
Local Authorities' role alongside trusts
In Chapter 1: Our children's futures we set out how important local partnership between
schools, trusts, local authorities and health services are in creating an environment that
help set our children up for life. As part of this, local authorities - through their statutory
duties, democratic mandate and geographic scale - are well placed to play a proactive
leadership role, in driving place-based convening and collaboration. Many already
embrace this, recognising their crucial role in seeing the whole child and coordinating
the right support around them.
This role is critical to local authorities' ability to fulfil key education duties, from ensuring
sufficient school places and supporting SEND provision, to managing admissions, home-
to-school transport and to support better outcomes in attendance and behaviour.
The Children's Wellbeing and Schools Bill introduces new, important responsibilities
and statutory duties to promote the safety and welfare of children: the requirement
for local authorities to maintain a register of children not in school, new requirements
around kinship care and family group decision-making, improved information sharing,
support for children in or leaving care, and extending the role of Virtual School Heads to
cover children in need and all children in kinship care.
All of these will require close, collaborative relationships with schools and trusts. Along
with the rest of government, we are committed to working in partnership with local
areas and supporting them in delivery.
Case study: Working across an area in Plymouth
Children's outcomes in Plymouth have been transformed over the past few years. In
2019, Plymouth secondary outcomes were the lowest in the South West, with
average A8 at 43.7 compared to 46.8 across the South West region and 46.7
nationally.
The Plymouth Challenge united city partners under an independent Chair and
secondary headteachers, bringing together MAT CEOs, council representatives,
Plymouth education networks, and support from the Department and civic leaders.
Regular meetings and a shared, place-based strategy enabled the Plymouth
Challenge to create clear structures for collective improvement and more coherent
regional working. Local leaders also noted that introducing a small number of strong
trusts streamlined the system compared with the previous 17 secondary schools
across 13 trusts.
Following the Challenge, the city has seen steady gains in outcomes relative to the
national average, with Attainment 8 now close to the local and national averages, at
45.7 compared to 46.2 across the South West and 46.0 nationally, and outcomes
for disadvantaged children improving from over 5 points behind the national
average in 2018/19, to within 0.6 points in 2024/25.
90
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Our approach will allow for a two-way dialogue and support the sharing of best practice.
As the proportion of schools in trusts grows, and it becomes more important for local
authorities to lead in convening, commissioning and working with the system to improve
educational outcomes, we will engage proactively with Directors of Children's Services to
support the delivery of strategic outcomes, and challenge where this is falling short.
We will use real time performance data to ensure a tight focus on service delivery, and
where there is failing, we will use all levers available to drive up performance.
Case study: Collaborating with schools across a local authority area
The Local Authority area of Wakefield comprises a mix of urban centres and rural
areas, and 66% of the 140 schools are academies. Collaboration, openness, and
promoting inclusion are key elements of the local authority's role in the local school
system. It has focused on maximising space and resources across the area to
provide high-quality learning environments for those with additional needs and
reduce the reliance on the specialist sector, and on promoting strong practice
across the sector within academies and maintained schools. They have also
identified opportunities to build resources through collaboration - for example,
through involvement with Schools Rebuilding Programme.
The local authority has a well-established relationship with the 18 trusts in the local
area, which enables it to collaborate with them on removing barriers for
improvement across the area. Leaders come together on an Executive Leadership
Board, co-chaired by a trust leader and the Director of Children's Services, as a
forum for collaboration, problem solving and horizon scanning. The local authority
has a dedicated website for education services, with a range of resources for both
maintained schools and academies.
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
91
Chapter 7: Enabling innovation and ambition
Vision
Innovation must be a defining feature of a school system that delivers for every
child. We must draw on the expertise and creativity of those already working across our
school system, harness the opportunities of technology and create the conditions for
innovation to spread.
Across the country, schools and trusts already hold the expertise, creativity and
determination needed to meet the ambitions of this white paper, as has been
demonstrated by the case studies throughout. For almost every challenge our system
faces, there is excellent practice somewhere, or the ingenuity to develop it.
Government will play its part by creating the conditions for innovation to flourish:
supporting leaders to identify promising ideas, test them in different communities, and
scale up what works so that every child benefits, and recognise this excellence in our
accountability system.
Case for change
We must create a self-improving system where effective innovation is encouraged;
evidence leads outstanding practice; and where collaboration is a core responsibility of
every school leader.
A stronger, system-wide culture of innovation is essential to drive improvement at scale.
The best leaders in our system have the confidence, support and clarity to identify
promising ideas, test them in different communities and grow the approaches that work.
To make a reality of improvement at scale we need to create these conditions more
consistently. We particularly need to ensure that areas of the system facing the toughest
challenges have access to the tools, evidence and partnerships to drive disciplined,
place-based innovation. Without this, great practice remains isolated rather than shared,
amplified and focused where it can have the greatest impact for children.
To develop a stronger and more resilient system, we need to ensure that the best new
ideas are available to all schools quickly and easily. There is currently no central,
accessible way for school leaders to understand and learn from the best evidence-led
practice across the sector. Too often the expertise of the best teachers and leaders
remains in their own schools, rather than being multiplied through collaboration. By
supporting schools to more effectively benchmark their performance and make smart
investments in evidence-based support, we will strengthen resilience and ensure that
improvement is not a one-off effort but a sustained, evolving commitment.
Nowhere is the need for effective innovation more necessary, nor the opportunity greater,
than in the use of technology. We are living through huge advancements in the use of
data and technology, particularly AI, to transform educational outcomes. These tools
have the potential to give teachers new insights and save them time, allowing them to
focus on the human interaction that is so essential to teaching. However, many teachers
feel unequipped to use these tools effectively - either in the classroom or to help manage
their workload. 214 As the education technology (EdTech) sector continues to develop
rapidly, we must ensure that evidence of impact on outcomes for children drives
92
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
decisions on which tools schools use. We must learn from the schools who are already
innovating to maximise the benefits that technology can bring while carefully managing
the risks.
Finally, high and rising standards for all children must be underpinned by a strong, fair
and nuanced accountability system that supports excellence, innovation, transparency
and continuous improvement. Trusts and schools need clarity about expectations,
incentives that reward the right behaviours, and information that supports improvement.
Parents need a rounded picture of their child's school.
A self-improving system
Those working in our schools and trusts have the expertise needed to deliver the
ambitions in this white paper. In answer to almost any question or challenge our
education system faces, there is existing excellent practice somewhere, or the
willingness to innovate to find it. A teacher who has found the answer; a school leader
trying something new; or an attendance support officer building new relationships. It falls
to government to set the priorities and standards we expect for our children and to create
the conditions which enable those ambitions to be fulfilled. But it is our teachers, leaders,
teaching assistants, attendance advisers, liaison officers and all those working with
children and families that are the experts in delivering high standards.
Many teachers and school leaders are experienced in tackling school challenges head-on
and driving forward excellence for their children. However, this expertise often stays in
just those schools, rather than being multiplied through collaboration. This results in some
of our best schools flourishing, while others have been allowed to struggle, and ultimately
children bear the consequences.
We will make a self-improving school system a reality: one where every good
school leader sees collaboration and sharing their practice as being at the core of
what they do.
This is reinforced in Ofsted's new inspection framework, which places an emphasis on the
best schools sharing their expertise as part of the 'exceptional' grade.
We have already made an initial £20m investment in the RISE programme to help schools
to navigate a pathway to improvement, no matter how well they are currently
performing. Universal RISE, the service for all schools, will harness the capacity of our
best schools and trusts, incentivising and supporting them to drive improvement across
the system. We want good schools to become great ones, and we expect great schools
to be engines of change across the whole system.
Alongside this, we want to cultivate a vibrant marketplace of innovative, commercial
offers by encouraging schools to select offers that can help them the most.
We will build a new one-stop-shop digital platform for schools and signpost
them to quality assured support to empower smart investment in data-driven,
evidence-led self-improvement.
The new digital platform will provide schools with data that diagnoses their
performance strengths and needs, allowing them to benchmark their performance
against similar schools. This will help schools identify strengths and targeted areas for
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
93
improvement, make more informed decisions, allocate resources more effectively, and
track progress over time with greater confidence. By bringing together clear insights in
one place, the platform will help schools prioritise interventions with the greatest impact
on children's outcomes.
In addition, we will help schools navigate towards high-quality, trusted support from a
range of sources such as strong performing schools and trusts, effective commercial
programmes, and RISE Hubs: empowering schools to make smart investments to
improve outcomes.
We will work with the EEF so that more school leaders and teachers access its
high-quality research on what works to improve academic progress and attainment,
while supporting networks and organising conferences to share best practice. We will
continue to work with the EEF so that more schools benefit from their expertise and vital
role in championing and implementing evidence-based practice.
Our support will focus on the schools which will benefit most with a particular focus on
disadvantage. Through regional hubs, we will fund a suite of enhanced RISE
programmes on priorities such as attainment, inclusion, reception year and
attendance. We will fund and deliver this support in a way that encourages the
emergence of new ideas that have impact to benefit children, supporting innovative
practice, to raise standards for all children.
Where standards are too low, we must be prepared to take action quickly and decisively
in the best interests of our children. For some schools, immediate intervention is
imperative and we will not hesitate to change the governance of schools where that is
necessary. But in cases where schools have the capacity to improve despite ingrained
challenges, mandatory Targeted RISE intervention will provide the tailored, intensive
support necessary to turn things around. RISE advisers, working with the school's
responsible body and with the partnership of a high performing local trust or school, will
be backed with the resources to address the underlying causes of poor performance. And
we are not waiting to take action: between the start of this academic year and January
2026, RISE teams have doubled their engagement from 200 to 400 'stuck' and 'causing
concern' schools, reaching almost 215,000 children. 215 From September 2026, we will
begin working with schools requiring significant improvement.
We will also consult on how to expand eligibility to include schools with the very
lowest levels of pupil achievement from January 2027 so that these schools can get
the rapid support they need to improve outcomes for children.
Harnessing and spreading innovation in the sector
Teachers and leaders are passionately committed to the success of their pupils.
Government's role is to support them: to encourage the best, challenge and empower the
good schools to be great and to intervene where standards are low so that every child
receives an excellent education. At a time when resources are necessarily constrained, it
is even more important to share best practice, to innovate and to share the ways schools
have found to deliver an excellent, rounded education. Trusts and school partnerships
have the reach and capacity to help drive transformation and learning not just for
themselves but as system leaders.
94
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
A high performing education system builds from best practice on the ground, invites
innovation and embeds learning at every level. Our universal RISE teams will be focused
on building partnerships to turbo charge best practice. We have stretching ambitions for
our children and young people, and we will give schools the data and support they need
to meet these asks.
Our best schools and trusts are already shaping what's possible. This is our Call to
Action for the sector: we are asking our best leaders to come forward with their ideas to
innovate across a range of new areas vital in supporting all children to achieve and thrive.
We will build on brilliant leaders' expertise, amplify their impact, and give them
the platform from which to lead.
We are not defining what this support should look like at this stage, as we want the sector
to shape it and will adapt our offer in response to what schools tell us they need. Effective
innovation is disciplined and builds on the best ideas that have come before. That is why
our Call to Action is underpinned by a test, learn and grow approach establishing what
works in communities, rigorously testing effectiveness and championing the best work
across the country.
While being led by the sector, we particularly want the Call to Action to focus on big
system challenges that reflect the core themes of this white paper and where we have
heard from the sector that unlocking progress will make a transformational difference.
Within the theme of 'narrow to broad', for example, we need to find ways to tackle the
stubborn barriers that prevent children with SEND or from disadvantaged backgrounds
from accessing opportunities for enrichment. And working through the new RISE Key
Stage 3 Alliance, we want to identify ways to improve the transition from primary to
secondary and support progress at Key Stage 3 so that children make the best start
possible to the next phase of their education.
Innovation through technology, Al and data
AI is changing the face of education and society. Technology can - and should -
support children and young people's education and wellbeing rather than distract
from it. We must harness the power of technology and equip teachers with innovative
tools to prepare children for an Al-driven future. Technology is rapidly evolving and has
the power to enrich education, driving outcomes for all children, especially the most
disadvantaged. It also has the power to support teachers with tools that give them new
insights and save them time, allowing them to focus on the human interaction that is so
essential to teaching. Globally, we are leading the way in ensuring generative AI
developments for education are founded on strong teaching practice, strengthening
rather than substituting the expertise of teachers. Evidence suggests that cutting edge
technology rooted in sound educational practice has the potential to improve children's
attainment and provide intelligent feedback,216 as well as reduce teacher workload. 217
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
95
Case study: Oak National Academy
Oak National Academy's free and optional Al lesson planning assistant, Aila, is
designed to save teachers significant time on planning and resourcing high-quality,
national curriculum-aligned lessons. Nearly two-thirds of surveyed teachers who
had used Aila said it reduced their workload or helped them reclaim time for other
priorities, with an average of 3 hours saved. 218 Teachers retain control throughout
the planning process, steering the tool to co-create lesson resources that reflect
pupil needs and school contexts. 219 Aila draws on Oak's quality-assured content,
crafted and tested by teachers and subject experts, and meets the highest
standards of Al safety.
Ensuring every child can thrive in the digital world
Every classroom needs to keep up with the pace of technological change so
children can make sense of the world around them. Technology can broaden
children's experiences by opening up access to rich content, diverse perspectives, and
learning opportunities that extend beyond the classroom. Above all, technology offers
children a way to connect with a broader body of knowledge and expertise, helping them
explore ideas, deepen understanding, and engage more confidently. As part of everyday
school life, digital tools can support collaboration, creativity, and independence in ways
that complement strong teaching. For children with SEND, well-chosen assistive
technologies can reduce barriers and enable more individual needs to be met through
learning.
Government, industry and schools all have a responsibility to make sure that technology
is used in ways that strengthen outcomes for children, increase support for
disadvantaged children and help widen access to high-quality learning. The
government's consultation on children's use of social media along with guidance for
parents and schools will support age-appropriate choices that protect children's
wellbeing.
The right tools for teaching and learning - safe, evidence-based and
innovative EdTech and AI products
We are ambitious about the role AI and technology can play in education and
uncompromising in our pursuit of safe and highly effective tools and models. They need
to be built on robust evidence, aligned with the curriculum, and shaped by the realities of
school life. Emerging evidence has shown that simply using general-purpose AI in
education often has negative outcomes, because it simply gives answers rather than
helping children learn and building their cognition; by contrast, there are some promising
signs for well-designed tools that are specifically built for educational purposes, and are
rooted in good pedagogy.²²⁰
We will expect all AI tools used by schools to meet high standards of safety and
quality.
We are working with the school sector to set out clear principles for the safe and
evidence-based use of AI in education. We will work with AI and sector experts to
establish safety standards and efficacy assessments for EdTech and AI tools used in
96
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
education, including by updating our AI product safety standards to account for emerging
risks around mental health and social, emotional and cognitive development, and to help
make sure that AI products used in education do not cause harm.
Following the Curriculum and Assessment Review, we are working with Oak to digitise
the refreshed National Curriculum to create a dynamic, connected framework which
will help to show links across and within subjects. Oak will advise on the digital framework
through which we steer and organise curriculum content. We will harness the
opportunities that EdTech present so that they can build on the curriculum and draw from
high-quality content. Tools must be evidenced, with rapid, powerful, data-driven feedback
loops to show what works for improving children's outcomes. A digitised curriculum is
critical to making sure that everyone in the fast-growing EdTech market can link their new
ideas and products effectively and deeply to the refreshed national curriculum, in a well-
sequenced way that will help children make real progress.
In 2026, we will build on the content store (which holds trusted content from Oak, EEF
and others) so that AI tools are underpinned by rigorous, sequenced content that
supports real progress for children.
We will work with industry to drive adoption of our standards and digital National
Curriculum to improve the safety and quality of tools. This includes working with
frontier labs - organisations such as Google DeepMind and OpenAl who are already
working with government on initiatives designed to develop sovereign solutions to the
UK's hardest problems, including in education. This will give us a unique foundation of
safety and quality from which we can innovate, building on the appetite for innovation
from within the school system.
The evidence is clear that high-quality teachers are the most important lever that schools
have to improve pupil outcomes. 221 It also shows that high-quality one to one tutoring
can also be hugely impactful, accelerating a pupil's learning by around five months. 222 But
access to tutoring is deeply unequal, with children from wealthier families far more likely
to benefit.
We will support the development and trialling of AI tutoring tools for secondary
school children, working alongside teachers, Al labs and leading tech companies.
The aim is to bring these tools to a similar level of quality to offer, at scale, the kind of
personalised one to one support often only available to a privileged few. Teacher-led
co-creation of AI tutoring tools with industry will begin from summer term this year. The
tools would then be available to schools by the end of 2027 and could support thousands
of children every year to access one to one tutoring.
We will work with teachers, AI labs and leading tech companies to robustly test AI
tutoring tools, so that they are safe and work for children, including the most
disadvantaged, and school staff. This includes ensuring they work in tandem with the
National Curriculum to build on children's learning in class. The tools will complement
high-quality face-to-face teaching - not replace it - offering targeted support to students
who need it most while also pushing the most able children to go further.
We will build sovereign education benchmarks to assess the safety and
pedagogy of AI in education, working together with a taskforce of educational
experts.
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
97
This will firmly guide technology companies to develop products that support better
educational outcomes for children, and will be delivered in partnership with the
Department for Science, Innovation and Technology, and the Prime Minister's AI incubator
team.
We will also build an evidence base around the efficacy of these tools alongside
continuing to stimulate innovations designed specifically around the needs of teachers
and administrators.
We will invest an additional £23 million to expand the EdTech Impact Testbed pilot
into a 4-year programme and develop our wider research strategy to understand the
effects of AI on learning and wellbeing.
Case study: Innovative AI feedback and formative assessment tools
Following DfE's initial £1m funding in 2024, Innovate UK (part of UKRI) has now
committed an additional £1m to developing promising Al feedback and formative
assessment tools.
Funded projects include:
'stylus': an Al assessment and improvement service which supports teachers to
assess children's handwritten work, providing personalised reports, feedback
and analysis at individual, class and school group level. 'stylus' has reported
that it has saved each teacher a total of 219 hours per year.
'Rubrical': an Al geography formative assessment tool, which supports teachers
to provide feedback and generate detailed class-level analytics on geography
schoolwork. Teachers report a 52% reduction in marking time in the developer's
tests.
'LoopAl Mathematics': a tool designed to help teachers with marking and
feedback in secondary schools by using generative Al to analyse children's
mathematical reasoning step by step. It builds on a previous 'LoopAl
Computing' prototype, for which the developer's pilots estimated savings of
3-5 hours per week per teacher and an 89% teacher-Al agreement on
feedback quality.
This technology has the potential to help a wide range of children, and by investing in
assistive technology, such as communication aids, screen readers and Al-powered eye
gaze software, we can make an even more powerful difference specifically for children
with SEND. In September 2025, we invested over £1.6 million to pilot assistive technology
lending libraries, which will enable up to 3,800 mainstream schools across 30 local
authorities to borrow tech to 'try before you buy', building their confidence in what works
so that more children with SEND can learn independently alongside their peers.
98
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Access to high-quality data
Schools have more data at their fingertips than ever before. Harnessing this can provide
fast, accurate insights to improve children's outcomes and help schools deploy their
resources wisely. We want data to flow seamlessly, not be locked within individual
systems, so insights can be put directly into the hands of teachers, leaders and parents.
As the foundation to delivering this:
We will develop a new 'data spine' that will create a secure, privacy-respecting and
streamlined way to connect and share information across different systems in
education.
This will include data such as pupil records, attendance, progress and assessments. It will
ensure a steady stream of connected information that empowers school staff, provides
more immediate insight about the effectiveness of interventions (including AI and tech)
and simplifies experiences for parents and carers. Along with updated safety standards
and our planned sovereign education benchmarks, this will help support schools as they
make decisions about what EdTech tools to invest in.
We will also ensure that new tools such as the recently launched Education Record app,
and our plans for recording the needs of children and young people with SEND speak to
one another and are informed by user research.
Giving the schools workforce the confidence and expertise to use Digital
and AI safely
At the core of teaching is human connection, but as technology and AI continue to
advance, it is crucial that we support school leaders, teachers and support staff to extract
the most from the benefits they have to offer.
We will set out a clear and progressive skills pathway for digital and data skills
for the education workforce to increase their confidence and expertise in using
digital and AI safely and effectively.
We will integrate these skills into existing professional qualifications and, working with
organisations that offer support which aligns with the pathway, give school leaders more
certainty that they are investing in high-quality training.
Ensuring all schools have safe and reliable connectivity and infrastructure
We are improving school connectivity: investing a further £325m in upgrading wireless
networks through Connect the Classroom and enabling every school to get access to
high-speed internet. We are also helping schools make decisions on technology with
clear digital standards and services such as 'Plan Technology for Your School'. We have
set the ambition for all schools to meet six core standards by 2030 so that all schools will
have safe and efficient technology which meets the needs of their children.
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
99
Case study: Practical applications of technology and AI in primary
education
LEO Academy Trust has embraced Al to enhance learning and streamline teaching.
In classrooms, while teachers remain mindful of screen time, children use high-
quality technology tools to support creative writing, receiving instant feedback and
suggestions to improve their work. Teachers employ Al to automate lesson planning
and adapt tasks based on individual child needs, saving time and improving
inclusivity. The Trust's use of technology is supporting children with SEND, with
children able to access assistive technology when needed.
Al also assists in formative assessment by analysing children's responses and
generating tailored next steps, which shows the potential benefits AI (if used
correctly) can have on enriching children's learning experience and reducing teacher
workload. Pedagogy is at the heart of how the trust uses technology. The trust
makes careful choices about when technology is used and when it is not.
Use of technology at the trust has improved staff satisfaction and the trust is
consistently 15-20% above national benchmarks. This is attributed to the reduction
in administrative tasks such as lesson scaffolding and resource adaptation.
Working in partnership on AI
To deliver this ambitious vision, we are working in collaboration across government and
with schools, the FE sector, the education technology market including frontier Al labs
and big tech, experts, parents and young people to develop a vision and plan to harness
AI in education, focusing not just on upskilling but the best models for education in an
Al-enabled future. Our recently launched AI Safety and Pedagogy Taskforce will work
with teachers and AI experts to develop safety and pedagogy benchmarks for this work.
They will be supported by a sector stakeholder group that will help steer the wider
programme, addressing challenges and risks, building the right safety and assurance
frameworks as we scale up AI and data capability in the education sector. And we will
work closely with sector representatives through our Improving Education Together
partnership, to make sure that our interventions make a genuine difference in schools
throughout the country.
Setting clear expectations and improving accountability
To build a thriving innovation culture, we need an accountability structure that both
accelerates what works and enables us to 'fail fast' when new ideas do not. The right
accountability approach should empower innovation, not constrain it, by making
improvement visible and actionable across the system. We must have high
expectations for every child, not only some. An essential part of this is recognising that
excellence and inclusion go together hand-in-hand.
Guided by the principles we agreed with the sector in our response to the School
Accountability Reform consultation, we are committed to implementing an accountability
system which improves outcomes for all children, provides transparent and reliable
information that informs parental choice and supports schools to improve. 223
100
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Ofsted is implementing its renewed inspection framework that gives parents and staff
a much clearer, broader picture of school performance. 224 The renewed framework
and new report cards strengthen accountability, with a stronger focus on achievement,
attendance, inclusion and how the needs of disadvantaged and vulnerable young people
are being met.
This renewed inspection framework, along with the new School Profiles (see Chapter 4:
Withdrawn to engaging) will provide parents with a clear and rounded picture of each
school. By providing transparent information about all groups of children, including how
the most able are doing, we will ensure that schools are incentivised to deliver for every
child.
For the first time Ofsted has emphasised holding schools to account for their inclusive
practice and support offer for children with additional needs. Ofsted inspectors evaluate
how schools set high expectations for all children and young people (including those with
SEND), and put the right support in place to meet their needs.
Our accountability reforms will ensure greater breadth in the curriculum. As set out
in Chapter 2: Narrow to broad and our response to the Curriculum and Assessment
Review, we will improve Progress 8.
We will also consult on how to better recognise schools that are successful in achieving
progress for all children through the development of a new progress measure, in addition
to Progress 8, focused on the progress made by children who start secondary school
significantly behind their peers (see Chapter 3: Sidelined to included).
As school trusts take on a greater role in delivering for children, we will strengthen the
accountability system. Trust-level inspection will give parents and communities a
transparent view of the quality of leadership, the support it provides, and the outcomes
it secures. This sits within a broader shift towards an accountability system that is more
intelligent, proportionate and focused on improvement.
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
101
Implementation: Delivering our ambition for
every child
We have set out how together we will build a school system that enables all children to
achieve and thrive, regardless of their background or need. This is an ambitious vision
that will take sustained and determined action over time. We will work with schools and
wider partners to enable timely and effective implementation.
We have set out a series of asks of schools and other partners - some are new
requirements and reforms; others are updates to existing policies. Some are mandatory
and others are optional. Schools that are not yet following best practice, or need
improvement, may face greater challenges over the next few years. Schools that already
provide an excellent, inclusive education, will still need to implement some changes, like
the new curriculum, but will also focus on sharing expertise with other schools in their
local area and beyond.
We are also providing schools with an offer of support. This includes significant financial
investment, better, evidence-backed guidance and tools, and help for schools not yet
following best practice to learn from others.
Providing schools with funding
We are investing in schools to deliver these changes. This includes extensive
investment in the core schools' budget, which we have already increased by £3.7 billion
in 2025-26 compared to 2024-25. We are adding to this through the additional funding
announced in this white paper. We are investing an extra £1.7 billion into schools in
2026-7, meaning the core schools' budget will total £67.0 billion compared to £65.3
billion in 2025-26. This will then continue to increase across the Spending Review period
- seeing an above real terms per pupil increase in funding.
This includes significant investment over 3 years to support mainstream inclusion.
From 2026-27 we will provide £1.6 billion for the Inclusive Mainstream Fund for schools,
colleges and early years settings to deliver an improved inclusion offer, £1.8 billion for
Experts at Hand, and a SEND training programme of over £200 million. This is in addition
to £3.7 billion of capital investment from 2025-26. Further details can be found in SEND
Reform: Putting Children and Young People First.
We are also ensuring our substantial funding to schools is distributed as effectively
as possible, which is why we are boosting the impact of Pupil Premium and National
Funding Formula deprivation funding, driving this to where children's needs are greatest.
We will move to a direct National Funding Formula for schools - which will mean that
every mainstream school's funding is determined by the same, national, formula. This will
ensure that schools are funded on a fair basis wherever they are in the country, and will
support wider reforms to create a more inclusive mainstream education system (as set
out in SEND Reform: Putting Children and Young People First). Currently, individual
schools' actual funding allocations are determined by over 150 local authority funding
formulae. Local authorities have moved their funding formula closer to the National
Funding Formula in recent years, and the majority of local formulae now mirror the
National Funding Formula, and so the move to a direct National Funding Formula is the
final step in this direction of travel, delivering a nationally consistent approach.
102
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Funding for schools sits alongside significant investment to support children and
young people before they enter school and beyond the school gates, as set out in
Chapter 1: Our children's future. These changes restore support for children, lessening
the burden on schools having to step in where wider services have not had the necessary
investment and ensuring all children arrive at school ready to learn.
Supporting schools with change
Schools are not alone in delivering these reforms. As set out above, all schools will be
able to access support to align with best practice through the RISE service. Schools with
greater changes to make will be able to harness the expertise of those who are already
implementing best practice. We also expect that putting collaboration at the heart of the
school system will further support this, by moving to all schools being part of a high-
quality school trust.
While some changes bring new asks on schools, many will free up capacity in schools,
once established. We are offering better, evidence-backed guidance and tools across a
wide range of areas to help schools work more effectively to reduce issues and save staff
time. For example, an improved complaints process should reduce duplication and new
Behaviour in Schools guidance will, once in place, enable schools to minimise disruption.
This support extends to helping schools get the best value out of their existing funding
and resources for children. We have launched a new programme, Maximising Value for
Pupils, to provide schools with a suite of tools, services and guidance to facilitate local
decision-making. We are also taking action ourselves to address the systemic issues that
drive costs and prevent schools from maximising value and directing funds to where they
will directly benefit children.
We know that the volume and complexity of guidance issued to schools has grown
significantly over time, requiring them to navigate substantial and often fragmented
information. This creates an unnecessary administrative burden for leaders and their staff,
making it harder to identify what is essential, current, and actionable. Working with school
leaders and representation groups:
We will create a single, easy-to-use home for all school guidance, and ensure
that all guidance is shorter, clearer, and easier to use.
This will bring together both statutory and non-statutory material in one place and include
Al-enabled search and support tools, making it simpler and faster for school leaders
and teachers to find the information they need. We will also ensure that every change
to guidance is explained in plain language so that schools can quickly understand what
has been updated and why. We will simplify the most used guidance documents and
consolidate or archive the least used guidance.
Carefully sequencing and phasing major reforms
We are committed to engaging with schools and partners on how we implement these
and future reforms. Whilst we make no apologies for having high expectations of schools
where change is critical to delivering for children, we also want to ensure that change is
made sensibly. Where possible, we will test and pilot ahead of changes being made - as
we have done, for example, with breakfast clubs. We also want to ensure that schools
have sufficient time to prepare, although the amount of time will be dependent on the
level of change in question.
Part 2: Stronger foundations to deliver change
103
We will work with the sector to assess what an appropriate minimum lead-in
time would be for schools to prepare for different kinds of changes.
Where we continue to consult, we will ensure that this takes into account schools'
capacity to undertake further reforms. For our SEND reforms in particular, collaborating
with the sector is essential to ensure that these changes meet the needs of schools, their
learners and their staff. SEND Reform: Putting Children and Young People First sets out
the details we plan to consult on further with a wide range of stakeholders, following
engagement already undertaken.
We have also considered how we can ensure that these reforms are implemented in a
structured and practical way for schools, whilst ensuring we are relentlessly delivering for
children. This includes carefully sequencing reforms throughout the coming
academic years. We have also considered which parts of the school workforce, and
which types of schools will be most affected by different changes.
Implementation will come in three phases that overlap: aligning to best practice from
academic year (AY) 25/26, preparing for the major SEND and curriculum reforms from AY
26/27, and full implementation of reforms from AY 28/29. The timeline below gives a
broad indication for when schools and other partners might expect to implement key
reforms. While milestones will remain subject to change, for example depending on the
passage of legislation through parliament, or based on ongoing feedback from the sector,
we aim to give schools confidence in their ability to deliver these reforms, and parents
and families confidence in the positive impacts their children will see over time.
Figure 7: Timeline
Phase 1:
Phase 2:
Phase 3:
Aligning to best practice and
Preparation for SEND and
Full reform
higher standards
curriculum reforms
implementation
AY 2025/6 to 2026/7
AY 2026/7 to 2027/8
AY 2028/9 onwards
In this phase, we will publish
Support becomes available
Schools will be better
updated and new guidance, such
for schools to align with new
aligned with best practice
as Families as Partners and
SEND reforms, including
and prepared for SEND
Behaviour in Schools. We will
significant investment in
reforms and the new
expand the optional and targeted
schools, the SEND Workforce
curriculum incoming in
support to help schools align with
CPD launch, and the National
Autumn 2028.
best practice, such as Attendance
Inclusion Standards as well
& Behaviour Hubs, Universal and
as the new national
Targeted RISE, and the Key Stage 3
curriculum in 2027.
Alliance launch. This is supported
by pupil premium increase and
SEND capital investment.
104
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Conclusion: Working in partnership to deliver
this vision
We have a generational opportunity to empower our children and young people to look
out at a changing world, not scared about what the future brings but confident in their
ability to shape it. We want all young people to leave education having benefitted from a
well-rounded education, sure of their strengths and passions, with the curiosity to
embrace life-long learning and the resilience to adapt to change.
Parents, teachers and young people should never have to choose between academic
excellence and inclusion, knowledge and skills, belonging and stretch.
We know leaders, teachers and school staff share our aspirations for every child to
achieve and thrive. Schools and trusts across the country are already demonstrating what
can be achieved when working in partnership. Through this white paper, we set out the
steps we will take to harness and spread existing best practice, as well as empowering
each part of the system to innovate together to improve outcomes.
Delivering this vision will require all of us to work together to get behind our young
people's aspirations - by taking a narrow experience and making it broad, taking children
from sidelined to included and supporting children and families from withdrawn to
engaged.
This is our invitation to all those in the sector to work in partnership - both at national
level, and in every community across the country. Together, with collaboration and
determination, we can enable every child to achieve and thrive.
Technical Annex: Our aspiration for every child
105
Technical Annex: Our aspiration for
every child
This annex sets out how progress towards the targets will be measured.
Ambition 1: Higher standards for all
Progress will be tracked using the national average Attainment 8 (A8) score. The target is
to reach an average A8 score of 50, up from 45.9 in 2023/24 and 46.0 in 2024/25. 225
An A8 score of 50 is equivalent to an individual child achieving grade 5 in each GCSE slot
(or other approved qualification) included in the measure. This is a national ambition, not
a school-level target; expectations for individual children and schools will not all be the
same.
The methodology and qualifications in scope for Attainment 8 and Progress 8 are under
consultation following the publication of the government's response to the Curriculum and
Assessment Review. We will establish a reference group of leading educational research
organisations to monitor progress and keep targets consistent as the system evolves.
Ambition 2: Halving the Key Stage 4 disadvantage gap
The gap will be measured by the difference in national average A8 scores between
disadvantaged and non-disadvantaged children. At present, disadvantage is defined as
children eligible for Free School Meals in the past six years or looked after by a Local
Authority (including previously looked after children). The gap was 15.4 points in 2023/24
and 15.5 points in 2024/25.²²⁶ The target is to reduce this by half, to 7.7 points.
Meeting both ambitions - raising the national average A8 to 50 and halving the gap -
requires disadvantaged children's A8 scores to rise by around 10 points in total, roughly
one grade higher in each GCSE slot (with English and maths double weighted). If the pupil
population remains similar to that in 2024, this equates to around 1.3 million additional
grade improvements. Based on current relationships between A8 and English and maths
attainment, this also implies over 30,000 more disadvantaged children achieving grade 4+
in GCSE English and maths each year.
The definition of disadvantage is under review, with a view to adopting a household
income-based measure in future. The specific target levels will be reassessed following
any change to the definition, but the ambition will remain commensurate with halving
the gap.
This white paper also sets new targets to improve outcomes:
Attendance: Our ambition is to reduce the overall absence rate by 1.3 percentage
points - from 7.15% in 2023/24 to 5.85% in 2028/29. This improvement is equivalent to
children attending 20 million more days of school each year from 2028/29,
representing the fastest improvement in a decade. Progress will be monitored through
the School Census and daily attendance data. The 20 million days figure is calculated
as: pupil enrolments in 2023/24 X 190 school days X a 1.3-point reduction in absence
by 2028/29.
106
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
Key Stage 2: Our ambition is for the share of children achieving the expected
standard in reading, writing and maths to rise above the 2019 peak (64.9% overall;
51.3% disadvantaged) by the end of this Parliament. Assuming the cohort size remains
stable and the disadvantaged rate stays in line with recent years, over 25,000 more
children - including 10,000 disadvantaged children - would meet the expected
standard than if attainment remained at 2024 levels (60.7% overall; 45.5%
disadvantaged).
References
107
References
1 Where we refer to families and parents, we are referring to the adults at home with
responsibility for supporting and enabling a child's education, including carers.
2 The Good Childhood Report 2024 | The Children's Society
3 PISA 2022 Results (Volume I) OECD
4 PISA 2022 Results (Volume II) | OECD
5 Pupil attendance in schools, Week 2 2026 - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
6 Health Behaviour in School-aged Children (HBSC) England, 2023
7 Evidence to the STRB: 2026 pay award for teachers and leaders - GOV.UK (data
annex) See Table D7
8 DfE analysis of Schools Workforce Census, 2024 - see Schools, school workforce and
pupils statistical analysis 2026
9 Education in England: Annual Report 2020 - Education Policy Institute
10 Young people not in education, employment or training (NEET), UK - Office for National
Statistics
11 Data is drawn from the following sources: 1980-1999: Statistics of Education: Schools
in England 2000 [pdf]; 2000-2002: Schools, Pupils and their Characteristics Statistical
First Release (provisional), January 2010 [pdf]; 2003-2019: Schools, Pupils and their
Characteristics 2019 Accompanying Tables [xlsx] (See Table 1a); 2020-2025: 'Pupils in
all schools, by type of SEN provision - 2020 to 2025' from 'Special educational needs
in England', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
12 Understanding the use of unregistered alternative provision - May 2024 [pdf]
13 Beyond the classroom: the experiences of children with SEND who are not in school
- GOV.UK
14 Number of education, health (EHC) plans as at January each year' from 'Education,
health and care plans', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
15
https://www.suttontrust.com/our-research/double-disadvantage/
16 Giving every child the best start in life - GOV.UK
17 Curriculum and Assessment Review Final Report: government response - GOV.UK
18 'Attainment by pupil characteristics' from 'Key stage 2 attainment', Permanent data
table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
19 DfE analysis of School and College Voice data, December 2025 - see Schools, school
workforce and pupils statistical analysis 2026
20 'Absence by geographic level' from 'Pupil absence in schools in England', Permanent
data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
21 Kindred Squared (2026) School Readiness Survey 2025 [pdf]
22 Children of the 2020s: home learning environment and screen time at age 2: research
brief - GOV.UK
23 PBE | A long road to recovery: Local authority spending on early intervention children's
services 2010-11 to 2023-24 | PBE
24 Giving every child the best start in life - GOV.UK
25 Youth Matters: Your National Youth Strategy - GOV.UK
26 The Good Childhood Report 2025 | The Children's Society
27 Parent, pupil and learner voice: June 2025 - GOV.UK
108
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
28 Our Children, Our Future: Tackling Child Poverty - GOV.UK
29 Child Poverty Action Group (2025) Priced out of school: how lack of money prevents
young people from attending school [pdf]
30 Our Children, Our Future: Tackling Child Poverty - GOV.UK
31 Outcomes for children in need, including children looked after by local authorities in
England, Reporting year 2024 - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
32 MHW0043 - Evidence on Mental health and well-being of looked after children
33 Multiple disadvantage and KS4 attainment: evidence from LSYPE2 - GOV.UK
34 The lives of young carers in England - GOV.UK
35 The home learning environment and attainment - GOV.UK
36 The short- and medium-term effects of Sure Start on children's outcomes Institute for
Fiscal Studies
37 Families First Partnership programme - GOV.UK
38 Part 3: Education and employment - NHS England Digital
39 Our Children, Our Future: Tackling Child Poverty - GOV.UK
40 Magic Breakfast Evaluation report and executive summary [pdf]
41 Oral language interventions EEF
42 Coordinating mathematical success: the mathematics subject report - GOV.UK
43 Key stage 2 attainment and lifetime earnings - GOV.UK
44 In reading, between 66% (2016) and 75% (2025) of pupils met the expected standard
in each year between 2016 and 2025, excluding years in which there was no data due
to the pandemic. Key stage 2 attainment, Academic year 2024/25 Revised - Explore
education statistics - GOV.UK. This covers the period since testing of the new
curriculum began in 2016.
45 In maths, between 70% (2016) and 79% (2019) of pupils met the expected standard in
each year between 2016 and 2025, excluding years in which there was no data due to
the pandemic. In 2025 the figure was 74%. Key stage 2 attainment, Academic year
2024/25 Revised - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK. This covers the period since
testing of the new curriculum began in 2016.
46 42% of pupils with SEN met the expected standard in reading and 40% in maths: Key
stage 2 attainment, Academic year 2024/25 Revised - Explore education statistics
- GOV.UK
47 63% of disadvantaged pupils met the expected standard in reading and 61% in maths:
Key stage 2 attainment, Academic year 2024/25 Revised - Explore education statistics
- GOV.UK
48 60% of White British FSM eligible pupils met the expected standard in reading and
56% in maths: 'Attainment by pupil characteristics' from 'Key stage 2 attainment',
Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
49 Out of school activities during primary school and KS2 attainment [pdf]
50 Do extra-curricular activities in schools improve educational outcomes? A critical
review and meta-analysis of the literature. Int Rev Educ 56, 591-612
51 Laurus Trust - Student outcomes and Progress - Education Policy Institute, 2024
52 Parent, pupil and learner voice: June 2025 - GOV.UK
53 Parent, pupil and learner voice: omnibus surveys for 2024 to 2025, data tables,
December 2024 and June 2025
54 Parent, pupil and learner voice: omnibus surveys for 2024 to 2025, data tables,
December 2024 and June 2025
References
109
55 Parent, pupil and learner voice: omnibus surveys for 2024 to 2025, data tables,
December 2024
56 Access to extra-curricular provision and the association with outcomes - Education
Policy Institute
57 Parent, pupil and learner voice: omnibus surveys for 2024 to 2025, data tables,
December 2024 and June 2025
58 Access to extra-curricular provision and the association with outcomes - Education
Policy Institute
59 On the Powers of Powerful Knowledge
60 Post-16 education and skills White Paper - GOV.UK
61 'All state-funded pupil characteristics and geography data' from 'Key stage 4
performance', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
62 'All state-funded pupil characteristics and geography data' from 'Key stage 4
performance', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
63 Mind the Engagement Gap: A National Study of Pupil Engagement in England's
Schools
64 'Absence by pupil characteristics' from 'Pupil absence in schools in England',
Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
65 Disadvantage in early secondary school, Nuffield Foundation
66 Public First Polling for the White Working Class Commission - Public First - see Table
58, pupil tables
67 Out of school activities during primary school and KS2 attainment [pdf]
68 Do extra-curricular activities in schools improve educational outcomes? A critical
review and meta-analysis of the literature. Int Rev Educ 56, 591-612
69 Laurus Trust - Student outcomes and Progress - Education Policy Institute, 2024
70 Access to extra-curricular provision and the association with outcomes - Education
Policy Institute, 2024
71 An unequal playing field: extra-curricular activities, soft skills and social mobility - GOV.
UK
72 The Skills Imperative 2035 - NFER
73 Investigating cross-country differences in young people's skill development and
identifying factors associated with high-performance - NFER
74 Curriculum and Assessment Review Final Report: government response - GOV.UK
75 Parent, pupil and learner voice: omnibus surveys for 2024 to 2025, data tables,
December 2024 wave
76 Access to extra-curricular provision and the association with outcomes - Education
Policy Institute
77 Parent, pupil and learner voice: omnibus surveys for 2024 to 2025, data tables,
December 2024 and June 2025 waves
78 Parent, pupil and learner voice: omnibus surveys for 2024 to 2025, data tables,
December 2024 and June 2025 waves
79 Access to extra-curricular provision and the association with outcomes - Education
Policy Institute
80 Young people's experiences of careers information, advice and guidance
81 IPPR and The Difference (2025) Who is losing learning? Finding solutions to the school
engagement crisis [pdf]
110
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
82 Disadvantage - Education Policy Institute
83 The opportunity gap facing boys from low-income families at age 5 and beyond
Institute for Government
84 Key stage 2 attainment, Academic year 2024/25 Revised - Explore education statistics
- GOV.UK
85 Key stage 4 performance, Academic year 2024/25 - Explore education statistics -
GOV.UK
86 When and why do initially high-achieving poor children fall behind?: Oxford Review of
Education: Vol 43 No 1
87 'FSM eligibility by ethnicity or national curriculum year group' from 'Schools, pupils and
their characteristics', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
88 'All state-funded pupil characteristics and geography data' from 'Key stage 4
performance', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
89 ibid
90 'All state-funded pupil characteristics and geography data' from 'Key stage 4
performance', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
91 The forgotten fifth: Examining the early education trajectories of teenagers who fall
below the expected standards in GCSE English language and maths examinations at
age 16 - CLS working paper number 2022/6 Lee Elliot Major and Sam Parsons [pdf]
92 'All state-funded pupil characteristics and geography data' from 'Key stage 4
performance', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
93 '16-18 study leavers national level destinations' from '16-18 destination measures',
Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
94 Educational psychology services: workforce insights and school perspectives on
impact
95 DfE (2026), Time spent on process for new Education, Health and Care plans by local
authority professionals
96 Identifying pupils with special educational needs and disabilities - Education Policy
Institute
97 Identifying SEND - Education Policy Institute
98 High needs funding has increased in real terms five times faster than mainstream
school funding between 2019-20 and 2025-26. Calculated based on published school
funding numbers for the high needs block and schools.
99 Data is drawn from the following sources: 1980-1999: Statistics of Education: Schools
in England 2000 [pdf]; 2000-2002: Schools, Pupils and their Characteristics Statistical
First Release (provisional), January 2010 [pdf];2003-2019: Schools, Pupils and their
Characteristics 2019 Accompanying Tables [xlsx] (See Table 1a); 2020-2025: 'Pupils in
all schools, by type of SEN provision - 2020 to 2025' from 'Special educational needs
in England', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
100 'All state-funded pupil characteristics and geography data' from 'Key stage 4
performance', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
101 Measured using Attainment 8: 'All state-funded pupil characteristics and geography
data' from 'Key stage 4 performance', Permanent data table - Explore education
statistics - GOV.UK
102 The opportunity gap facing boys from low-income families at age 5 and beyond
Institute for Government
References
111
103 63% of White British FSM eligible pupils met the expected phonics standard in Year 1
in 2025, compared to 67% of all FSM eligible pupils and 80% of all pupils nationally -
see 'Phonics screening check attainment by pupil characteristics' from 'Phonics
screening check attainment', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics -
GOV.UK. At KS2, 43% of White British FSM eligible pupils met the expected standard
in reading, writing and maths in 2025, compared to 48% of all FSM eligible pupils and
62% of all pupils nationally - see 'Attainment by pupil characteristics' from 'Key stage
2 attainment, Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
104 Public First Polling for the White Working Class Commission - Public First - see Table
58, pupil tables
105 White British FSM eligible pupils have among the highest rates of identified SEN (36%)
of all minor ethnic groups, significantly above the national average (19%). This is
particularly true for white working-class boys, of whom 44% are identified as having
SEN, compared to 24% of all boys. See Special educational needs in England,
Academic year 2024/25 - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
106 Absence by pupil ethnicity and FSM eligibility - autumn and spring terms combined'
from 'Pupil absence in schools in England', Permanent data table - Explore education
statistics - GOV.UK
107 Unique new white working class education survey results published - Public First
108 How engaged are low-income White children during secondary school? Jerrim, J., UCL
Social Research Institute and ImpactEd Group, 2025
109 See Key Stage 4 Academic Performance Measures and Targeted RISE extension:
Government Consultation (technical annex). A slot is considered filled when a grade is
achieved for the qualification entered. A slot is considered empty if there is no
qualification to fill the slot or if the qualification is ungraded. The percentage of pupils
filling all 8 slots within Attainment 8/Progress 8 is 15% for all pupils, 33% for low prior
attaining pupils, 11% for mid prior attaining pupils and 4% for high prior attaining
pupils.
110 Pupil premium also includes looked after and previously looked after children, and
national funding formula deprivation funding allocations also use Indices of Deprivation
Affecting Children Index (IDACI).
111 Tackling the persistent disadvantage gap-A new approach to deprivation funding
- Education Policy Institute
112 In the vast majority of cases, though claims may need to continue for children missing
from income data.
113 Pupil premium and recovery premium evaluation - GOV.UK
114 Pupil Premium Statement Research: Academic Year 2024/25 - Research report
Education Endowment Foundation (EEF)
115 Using pupil premium: guidance for school leaders
116 Teaching and Learning Toolkit EEF
117 While this white paper focuses on the impact for children in schools, our
accompanying consultation document sets out the full detail of the reforms we plan to
make to the SEND system, built on this co-creation process, including the full breadth
of reforms across ages 0-25.
118 DfE analysis of National Pupil Database - based on the cohort in Y11 in 2024/25 -
see Schools, school workforce and pupils statistical analysis 2026
119 European Agency for Special Needs and Inclusive Education, Evidence: A Review of
the Literature (2018)
112
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
120 DfE (2026), Educational outcomes for pupils with SEND: comparing outcomes at
mainstream and special school settings across policy reforms
121 Education Select Committee (2025), Solving the SEND Crisis
122 Identifying pupils with special educational needs and disabilities - Education Policy
Institute
123 Identifying SEND - Education Policy Institute
124 Working lives of teachers and leaders: wave 3 - GOV.UK
125
High-quality teaching
EEF
126 School and college voice: January 2025 - GOV.UK
127 Working lives of teachers and leaders: wave 3 - GOV.UK
128
High-quality teaching
EEF
129 Special Educational Needs in Mainstream Schools EEF
130 The Children's Plan: The Children's Commissioner's School Census [pdf]
131 School and college voice: January 2025 - GOV.UK
132 Estimated days of support per setting are calculated by taking mainstream setting
population figures and average salary costs of experts including speech and language
therapists, education psychologists and specialist support staff.
133 Independent analysis of the consultation responses to the SEND review: right support,
right place, right time [pdf]
134 Ofsted (2025), Area SEND framework: findings from the first 2 years of inspections
135 Office of the Children's Commissioner (2022), An inconsistent approach to SEND,
findings from analysis of Education Health and Care Plans (EHCP) from two local
authorities in England
136 See annex accompanying the SEND Reform: Putting Children and Young People First
consultation document for background on projections
137 Teacher Tapp Insights, 'Home-school relationships', July 2024: Teacher Tapp Insights:
Home-school relationships - Teacher Tapp
138 The National Parent Survey 2024, ParentKind [pdf]
139 Pupil attendance in schools, Week 2 2026 - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
140 National behaviour survey report: 2023 to 2024 academic year - GOV.UK
141 Health Behaviour in School-aged Children (HBSC) England, 2023
142 PISA 2022 Results (Volume II) OECD
143
Report Mind the Engagement Gap
144 Pupil experiences in school: academic year 2024 to 2025 - GOV.UK
145 PISA 2022 Results (Volume II) OECD
146 Students' Sense of School Belonging TIMSS 2023
147 Korpershoek, H et al., 2020, The relationships between school belonging and students'
motivational, social-emotional, behavioural, and academic outcomes in secondary
education: a meta-analytic review
148 Parker, P., Allen, K.-A., Parker, R., Guo, J., Marsh, H. W., Basarkod, G., & Dicke, T.
(2022). School belonging predicts whether an emerging adult will be not in education,
employment, or training (NEET) after school. Journal of Educational Psychology, 114(8),
1881-1894
149 Adolescent School Belonging and Mental Health Outcomes in Young Adulthood:
Findings from a Multi-wave Prospective Cohort Study School Mental Health
References
113
150 Korpershoek, H et al., 2020, The relationships between school belonging and students'
motivational, social-emotional, behavioural, and academic outcomes in secondary
education: a meta-analytic review
151 Driven to Succeed? Teenagers' Drive, Ambition and Performance on High-Stakes
Examinations IZA - Institute of Labor Economics
152 Adolescent School Belonging and Mental Health Outcomes in Young Adulthood:
Findings from a Multi-wave Prospective Cohort Study School Mental Health
153 The long-term benefits of adolescent school engagement for adult educational and
employment outcomes - PubMed
154 Acting on the Engagement Gap: Insights from the Research Cohort
155 DfE analysis of School and College Voice data, December 2025 - see Schools, school
workforce and pupils statistical analysis 2026
156 Parental engagement EEF
157 John Hattie, 2009, Visible Learning: A Synthesis of Over 800 Meta-Analyses Relating to
Achievement
158 The home learning environment and attainment - GOV.UK
159 Department for Children, Schools and Families, 2007, Engaging Parents in Raising
Achievement: Do Parents Know They Matter? [pdf]
160 The National Parent Survey 2024, ParentKind [pdf]
161 Parentkind Report: Learning at home throughout the pandemic [pdf], 2022
162 Working with Parents to Support Children's Learning | EEF
163 Breaking down the gap - Education Policy Institute
164 Link between attendance and attainment - GOV.UK
165 'Absence by geographic level' from 'Pupil absence in schools in England', Permanent
data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
166 Pupil attendance in schools, Week 29 2025 - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
167 Equivalent to reducing overall absence to 5.85% in academic year 2028/29 compared
to 7.15% in 2023/24
168 'Absence by geographic level' from 'Pupil absence in schools in England', Permanent
data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
169 Pupil attendance in schools, Week 29 2025 - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
170 'Absence by pupil characteristics - autumn and spring terms combined' from 'Pupil
absence in schools in England', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics
- GOV.UK
171 Absence rates by geographic level - autumn and spring terms combined' from 'Pupil
absence in schools in England', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics
- GOV.UK
172 Absence by geographic level' from 'Pupil absence in schools in England', Permanent
data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK Note that one session is half a day,
so 8 million sessions equates to 4 million days
173 Research by Shelter suggests that over half (52%) of homeless children of school age
have missed days of school as a result of living in temporary accommodation. Of
these, more than one in three (37%) have missed more than a month of school. See
Still Living in Limbo: Why the use of temporary accommodation must end - Shelter
England
174 Improving Behaviour in Schools
EEF
114
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
175 Suspensions and permanent exclusions in England, Academic year 2023/24 - Explore
education statistics - GOV.UK
176 Suspensions and permanent exclusions - by multiple reasons (2020/21 onwards)' from
Suspensions and permanent exclusions in England', Permanent data table - Explore
education statistics - GOV.UK
177 Improving Behaviour in Schools | EEF
178 Public First (2025), What Parents Value in Education [pdf]
179 Tackling Child Exploitation (2021) Excluded or missing from education and child
exploitation: literature review and stakeholder views on safeguarding practice [pdf]
180 Suspensions and permanent exclusions - by characteristic' from 'Suspensions and
permanent exclusions in England', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics
- GOV.UK
181 Timpson Review of School Exclusion [pdf]
182 Alternative provision in local areas in England: a thematic review - GOV.UK
183 High-quality teaching EEF
184 Special Educational Needs in Mainstream Schools EEF
185 School and college voice: January 2025 - GOV.UK
186 Working lives of teachers and leaders: wave 3 - GOV.UK
187 School workforce in England, Reporting year 2024 - Explore education statistics -
GOV.UK
188 Initial Teacher Training Census, Academic year 2025/26 - Explore education statistics
- GOV.UK
189 Evidence to the STRB: 2026 pay award for teachers and leaders - GOV.UK
190 School workforce in England, Reporting year 2024 - Explore education statistics -
GOV.UK
191 Evidence to the STRB: 2026 pay award for teachers and leaders - GOV.UK (data
annex) See Table D7
192 Working lives of teachers and leaders: wave 4 - GOV.UK
193 DfE analysis of Schools Workforce Census, 2024 - see Schools, school workforce and
pupils statistical analysis 2026
194 'Size of the school workforce' from 'School workforce in England', Permanent data
table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
195 'Table 1.1 - ITT new entrants and trainee characteristics by subject' from 'Initial
Teacher Training Census', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.
UK
196 There were 6,742 new PGITT entrants for STEM subjects, an increase of 21%
compared to 2024/25 (5,593). This represents 107% of the PGITT STEM target (6,320),
the first time the overall STEM target has been met since it was introduced into
reporting in 2019/20. See Initial Teacher Training Census, Academic year 2025/26 -
Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
197 School workforce in England, Reporting year 2024 - Explore education statistics -
GOV.UK
198 Stakeholders report an increase in attacks/abuse against school staff. Physical
assaults on adults leading to suspensions rose by 61% between 2021/22 and 2023/24,
from 38,986 to 62,897. Permanent exclusions due to such assaults rose by 84%, from
References
115
1,011 to 1,860, in the same period. 'Suspensions and permanent exclusions - by
multiple reasons (2020/21 onwards)' from 'Suspensions and permanent exclusions in
England', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
199 Flexible working approaches
EEF
200 Evaluating a nine-day working fortnight as a strategy to improve teacher retention
EEF
201 'Qualified leavers from teaching' from 'School workforce in England', Permanent data
table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
202 Use of teaching assistants in schools - research report [pdf]
203 Deployment of Teaching Assistants EEF
204 School and college voice: January 2025 - GOV.UK
205 Working lives of teachers and leaders: wave 3 - GOV.UK
206 Evidence to the STRB: 2026 pay award for teachers and leaders - GOV.UK
207 Schools' responses to financial pressures 2023
208 The tendency is that larger MATs are less likely to have a deficit and hold larger
cumulative revenue surpluses. Academies consolidated annual report and accounts:
2022 to 2023 - GOV.UK
209 Teacher Retention and Turnover Research - Research Update 2: Teacher Dynamics in
Multi-Academy Trusts - NFER
210 See Schools, school workforce and pupils statistical analysis 2026. Trends in the
percentage of pupils achieving grades A* to C / 9 to 4 in English and maths since 2012
show pupils in both converter and sponsored academies perform better in relation to
the national average the more years they have been in the trust.
211 In general, pupils in both sponsored and converter academies make more progress in
larger trusts - see 'National multi-academy trusts data by trust characteristics' from
'Key stage 4 performance', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.
UK
212 See Schools, school workforce and pupils statistical analysis 2026. School financial
benchmarking data shows that maintained schools and Single Academy Trusts are
more likely to be in deficit than multi-school trusts.
213 These Commissioning High-Quality Trusts principles included: High-Quality and
Inclusive Education; School Improvement; Workforce; Finance and Operations; and
Governance and Leadership.
214 School and college voice: November 2024 - GOV.UK
215 RISE programme: lists of advisers and targeted schools - GOV.UK
216 Using Digital Technology to Improve Learning
EEF
217 ChatGPT in lesson preparation - Teacher Choices trial EEF
218 AI Lesson Assistant - Tools - AI Knowledge Hub
219 Understanding the 'Ai' in Aila Oak National Academy
220 OECD Digital Education Outlook 2026 OECD
221
High-quality teaching
EEF
222 One to one tuition
EEF
223 School Accountability Reform consultation School accountability reform - GOV.UK
224 DfE consultation response: School accountability reform - school profiles,
improvement and intervention: government consultation response; Ofsted response
Improving the way Ofsted inspects education: report on the responses to the
consultation - GOV.UK
116
Every Child Achieving and Thriving
225 Key stage 4 performance, Academic year 2024/25 - Explore education statistics -
GOV.UK
226 'All state-funded pupil characteristics and geography data' from 'Key stage 4
performance', Permanent data table - Explore education statistics - GOV.UK
Additional case studies:
E03470295
978-1-5286-6032-7
