4/11/26, 4:11 PM
Headteachers' standards 2020 - GOV.UK
GOV
UK
Department
for Education
Guidance
Headteachers' standards 2020
Updated 13 October 2020
Applies to England
Contents
Introduction
Section 1: Ethics and professional conduct
Section 2: Headteachers' standards
How the standards apply to different leadership roles
Resources
htt/wwwugvemet/uicaos/natial-standard-of-excellence-for-headteachers/headteachers-standards-2020
1/14
4/11/26, 4:11 PM
Headteachers' standards 2020 - GOV.UK
OGL
© Crown copyright 2020
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where
otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-
licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London
TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-
standards-of-excellence-for-headteachers/headteachers-standards-2020
htt/wwugovenment/ublications/natioalstandar-ofexcellence-fo-headteachers/headteachers-standards-2020
2/14
4/11/26, 4:11 PM
Headteachers' standards 2020 - GOV.UK
Introduction
Headteachers are leading professionals and role models for the
communities they serve. Their leadership is a significant factor in ensuring
high quality teaching and achievement in schools
[footnote 12]
and a positive
and enriching experience of education for pupils [footnote 8] Together with
those responsible for governance footnote 5] , they are custodians of the
nation's schools.
Parents
[footnote 6]
and the wider public rightly hold high expectations of
headteachers, given their influential position leading the teaching profession
and on the young people who are their responsibility. The headteachers'
standards set out how headteachers meet these high expectations. The
standards are an important benchmark not only for headteachers and those
who hold headteachers to account, but also for those who train and develop
school leaders.
These standards replace the national standards of excellence for
headteachers 2015. They are non-statutory and intended as guidance to be
interpreted in the context of each individual headteacher and school. They
are designed to be relevant to all headteachers.
The standards can be used to:
shape headteachers' own practice and professional development, within
and beyond the school
support the recruitment and appointment of headteachers, including the
development of job descriptions and person specifications
underpin frameworks for the training of school leaders, including current
and aspiring headteachers
inform the performance management of headteachers
Relationship to the teachers' standards
The teachers' standards (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/teachers-
standards) (2011, as amended), including the personal and professional
code of conduct which applies to teachers, provide a foundation upon which
the standards for headteachers are built.
Headteachers, like other teachers, are expected to meet the teachers'
standards. The headteachers' standards articulate how headteachers can
meet both the additional responsibilities of headship and the requirements
of the teachers' standards.
/wvmn/ucatio/natiastandr-o-eceence-or-headtechers/hedteachersstandards-2020
3/14
4/11/26, 4:11 PM
Headteachers' standards 2020 - GOV.UK
The first section of the headteachers' standards outlines the ethics and
professional conduct expected of headteachers. This is developed from part
2 of the teachers' standards. As such, they consist of statements that define
the behaviour and attitudes which should be expected of headteachers.
The second section sets out 10 headteachers' standards. The first 6
standards build on the teachers' standards, whereas the other 4 standards
focus on leadership responsibilities specific to headteachers. There is no
hierarchy to the standards; the numbering below is only to aid identification.
1. School culture (builds on teachers' standard 1)
2. Teaching (builds on teachers' standards 2 and 4)
3. Curriculum and assessment (builds on teachers' standards 3 and 6)
4. Behaviour (builds on teachers' standard 7)
5. Additional and special educational needs (builds on teachers' standard 5)
6. Professional development (some match to teachers' standard 4)
7. Organisational management
8. School improvement
9. Working in partnership
10. Governance and accountability
Domains
The ethics and professional conduct section is at the core of the standards.
This outlines the ethics and professional conduct expected of headteachers.
It consists of statements that define the behaviour and attitudes which
should be expected of headteachers.
The standards in section 2 cover interlinked domains of the headteacher's
role all underpinned by the governance and accountability domain.
Culture and ethos
school culture
behaviour
professional development
Curriculum and teaching
teaching
curriculum and assessment
additional and special educational needs
htt:/wwugovenment/uicatons/national-standards-of-ecelence-for-headteachers/headteachers-standards-2020
4/14
4/11/26, 4:11 PM
Headteachers' standards 2020 - GOV.UK
Organisational effectiveness
organisational management
school improvement
working in partnership
[footnote 7]
Section 1: Ethics and professional
conduct
Headteachers are expected to demonstrate consistently high standards of
principled and professional conduct. They are expected to meet the
teachers' standards and be responsible for providing the conditions in which
teachers can fulfil them.
Headteachers uphold and demonstrate the Seven Principles of Public Life
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-7-principles-of-public-life) at all
times. Known as the Nolan principles, these form the basis of the ethical
standards expected of public office holders:
selflessness
integrity
objectivity
accountability
openness
honesty
leadership
Headteachers uphold public trust in school leadership and maintain high
standards of ethics and behaviour. Both within and outside school,
headteachers:
build relationships rooted in mutual respect, and at all times observe
proper boundaries appropriate to their professional position
show tolerance of and respect for the rights of others, recognising
differences and respecting cultural diversity within contemporary Britain
uphold fundamental British values [footnote 3] , including democracy, the rule
of law, individual liberty and mutual respect, and tolerance of those with
different faiths and beliefs
htp://www.u/govermet/uications/natioal-standards-ofexcellence-for-headteachers/headteachers-standards-202
5/14
4/11/26, 4:11 PM
Headteachers' standards 2020 - GOV.UK
ensure that personal beliefs are not expressed in ways which exploit their
position, pupils' vulnerability or might lead pupils to break the law
As leaders of their school community and profession, headteachers:
serve in the best interests of the school's pupils
conduct themselves in a manner compatible with their influential position
in society by behaving ethically, fulfilling their professional responsibilities
and modelling the behaviour of a good citizen
[footnote 4]
uphold their obligation to give account and accept responsibility
know, understand, and act within the statutory frameworks which set out
their professional duties and responsibilities
take responsibility for their own continued professional development,
engaging critically with educational research
make a positive contribution to the wider education system
Section 2: Headteachers' standards
1. School culture
Headteachers:
establish and sustain the school's ethos and strategic direction in
partnership with those responsible for governance and through
consultation with the school community
create a culture where pupils experience a positive and enriching school
life
uphold ambitious educational standards which prepare pupils from all
backgrounds for their next phase of education and life
promote positive and respectful relationships across the school
community and a safe, orderly and inclusive environment
ensure a culture of high staff professionalism
htt/wwugovenmen/pubications/natonal-standards-of-excelence-for-headteachers/headteachers-standards-202
6/14
4/11/26, 4:11 PM
Headteachers' standards 2020 - GOV.UK
2. Teaching
Headteachers:
establish and sustain high-quality, expert teaching across all subjects and
phases, built on an evidence-informed understanding of effective
teaching and how pupils learn
ensure teaching is underpinned by high levels of subject expertise and
approaches which respect the distinct nature of subject disciplines or
specialist domains
ensure effective use is made of formative assessment
3. Curriculum and assessment
Headteachers:
ensure a broad, structured and coherent curriculum entitlement which
sets out the knowledge, skills and values that will be taught
establish effective curricular leadership, developing subject leaders with
high levels of relevant expertise with access to professional networks and
communities
ensure that all pupils are taught to read through the provision of
evidence-informed approaches to reading, particularly the use of
systematic synthetic phonics in schools that teach early reading
ensure valid, reliable and proportionate approaches are used when
assessing pupils' knowledge and understanding of the curriculum
4. Behaviour
Headteachers:
establish and sustain high expectations of behaviour for all pupils, built
upon relationships, rules and routines, which are understood clearly by all
staff and pupils
ensure high standards of pupil behaviour and courteous conduct in
accordance with the school's behaviour policy
7/14
4/11/26, 4:11 PM
Headteachers' standards 2020 - GOV.UK
implement consistent, fair and respectful approaches to managing
behaviour
ensure that adults within the school model and teach the behaviour of a
good citizen
5. Additional and special educational needs and
disabilities
Headteachers:
ensure the school holds ambitious expectations for all pupils with
additional and special educational needs and disabilities
establish and sustain culture and practices that enable pupils to access
the curriculum and learn effectively
ensure the school works effectively in partnership with parents, carers
and professionals, to identify the additional needs [footnote 9]
and special
educational needs and disabilities [footnote 10] of pupils, providing support
and adaptation where appropriate
ensure the school fulfils its statutory duties with regard to the SEND code
of practice
6. Professional development
Headteachers:
ensure staff have access to high-quality, sustained professional
development opportunities, aligned to balance the priorities of whole-
school improvement, team and individual needs
prioritise the professional development of staff, ensuring effective
planning, delivery and evaluation which is consistent with the approaches
laid out in the standard for teachers' professional development
ensure that professional development opportunities draw on expert
provision from beyond the school, as well as within it, including nationally
recognised career and professional frameworks and programmes to build
capacity and support succession planning
htps:wwugvement/uication/natiastadar-of-ecellece-for-headtechers/headteachersstadards202
8/14
4/11/26, 4:11 PM
Headteachers' standards 2020 - GOV.UK
7. Organisational management
Headteachers:
ensure the protection and safety of pupils and staff through effective
approaches to safeguarding [footnote 11] , as part of the duty of care [footnote
1]
prioritise and allocate financial resources appropriately, ensuring
efficiency, effectiveness and probity in the use of public funds
ensure staff are deployed and managed well with due attention paid to
workload
establish and oversee systems, processes and policies that enable the
school to operate effectively and efficiently
ensure rigorous approaches to identifying, managing and mitigating risk
8. Continuous school improvement
Headteachers:
make use of effective and proportional processes of evaluation to identify
and analyse complex or persistent problems and barriers which limit
school effectiveness, and identify priority areas for improvement
develop appropriate evidence-informed strategies for improvement as
part of well-targeted plans which are realistic, timely, appropriately
sequenced and suited to the school's context
ensure careful and effective implementation of improvement strategies,
which lead to sustained school improvement over time
9. Working in partnership
Headteachers:
forge constructive relationships beyond the school, working in partnership
with parents, carers and the local community
commit their school to work successfully with other schools and
organisations in a climate of mutual challenge and support
hp:/wwvemubicao/atastandaroexcelece-foeadteachers/headteachers-standards202
9/14
4/11/26, 4:11 PM
Headteachers' standards 2020 - GOV.UK
establish and maintain working relationships with fellow professionals and
colleagues across other public services to improve educational outcomes
for all pupils
10. Governance and accountability
Headteachers:
understand and welcome the role of effective governance, upholding their
obligation to give account and accept responsibility
establish and sustain professional working relationship with those
responsible for governance
ensure that staff know and understand their professional responsibilities
and are held to account
ensure the school effectively and efficiently operates within the required
regulatory frameworks and meets all statutory duties
How the standards apply to different
leadership roles
The headteacher's standards cover the full breadth of leadership
responsibilities within a single school. For most headteachers in maintained
schools or academies in single academy trusts this means that all of the
standards should be relevant to them, though it is anticipated that they will
meet some standards through the successful leadership and management
of teams and individuals within their schools.
There can be a range of job roles and titles for those leading individual
schools, particularly where a school is working within a group, such as in a
multi-academy trust. Job roles and titles are various, including Head of
School, and Associate Head, as are the governance arrangements to which
headteachers are accountable. In some settings headteachers are
responsible for leading more than one school. There are also instances of
shared headship through co-headship or job-shares. Employers [footnote 2] , in
such instances, will therefore want to decide which standards are applicable
to roles in these contexts.
ht/ugvement/pubicatons/atonalstandards-ofecelence-for-headteachers/headteachers-standards-202
10/14
4/11/26, 4:11 PM
Headteachers' standards 2020 - GOV.UK
Resources
Appraisal
Governance handbook
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/governance-handbook)
The Education (School Teachers' Appraisal) (England) Regulations 2012
(https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2012/115/contents/made)
Schoolteachers' pay and conditions
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/school-teachers-pay-and-conditions)
Equalities issues
Equalities and Human Rights commission (EHRC)
(https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/en)
Equality Act 2010: advice for schools
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/equality-act-2010-advice-for-
schools)
Fundamental British values
Guidance on promoting British values in schools
(https://www.gov.uk/government/news/guidance-on-promoting-british-values-in-
schools-published)
National Leaders of Education
National Leaders of Education (NLE) standards
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/review-of-the-national-leaders-of-
education-nle-programme)
11/14
4/11/26, 4:11 PM
Headteachers' standards 2020 - GOV.UK
National professional qualifications
National Professional Qualification for Executive Leadership (NPQEL)
National Professional Qualification for Headship (NPQH)
National Professional Qualifications for Middle Leaders (NPQML)
National Professional Qualifications for Senior Leaders (NPQSL)
Principles of public life
The Seven Principles of Public Life
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-7-principles-of-public-life)
SEND code of practice
SEND code of practice: 0 to 25 years
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-code-of-practice-0-to-25)
Standard for teachers' professional development
Standard for teachers' professional development
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/standard-for-teachers-professional-
development)
Teachers' standards
Teachers' standards (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/teachers-
standards)
1. Schools: whatever schools the standards are applied in, such as
maintained schools, academies and independent schools.
12/14
4/11/26, 4:11 PM
Headteachers' standards 2020 - GOV.UK
2. Pupils: should be taken to include references to children of all ages who
are taught by qualified teachers, including those in the early years
foundation stage, and those in post-16 education.
3. Those responsible for governance: should be taken to mean the
accountable body for the school or group of schools: in local authority
maintained schools, this will be the governing body and in an academy
trust this will be the board of trustees. (Committees to whom the board
has delegated functions should take account of guidance to the board, in
so far as the relevant function has been delegated to them.)
4. Parents: includes carers, guardians and other adults acting in loco
parentis.
5. Partnership: includes the external relationships with people and
organisations that contribute to the safeguarding, education and support
of pupils; to the development of the school community; and to the
education system.
6. Fundamental British values: as articulated in the prevent strategy, (June
2011), these values include democracy, the rule of law, individual liberty
and mutual respect and tolerance of different faiths and beliefs.
7. Good citizen: someone who adheres to fundamental British values.
8. Pupils with additional needs: refers to various groups of children and
young people who for a variety of reasons may face additional barriers to
education and learning. This makes it more difficult for them to achieve
their full potential. This may include pupils who are economically
disadvantaged (attracting pupil premium); who have, or have needed a
social worker, including children subject to child in need or child
protection plans, as well as looked-after and previously looked-after
children; and young carers.
9. Pupils with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND): a child or
young person has SEND if they have a learning difficulty or a disability
which calls for special educational provision to be made for him or her. A
child of compulsory school age or a young person has a learning difficulty
or a disability if he or she has a significantly greater difficulty in learning
than the majority of others of the same age, or has a disability which
prevents or hinders him or her from making use of educational facilities of
a kind generally provided for others of the same age in mainstream
schools or mainstream post-16 institutions.
10. Safeguarding: the action that is taken by headteachers and all staff to
promote the welfare of children and protect them from harm. This
includes but is not limited to:
protecting children from maltreatment
preventing impairment of children's health or development
ensuring that children grow up in circumstances consistent with the
provision of safe and effective care
13/14
4/11/26, 4:11 PM
Headteachers' standards 2020 - GOV.UK
taking action to enable all children to have the best outcomes
11. Duty of care: to do what is reasonable in all circumstances to safeguard
and promote the welfare of pupils and staff.
12. Employers: for the purposes of this document we define employer as the
body or person responsible for employing the headteacher. Some
responsibilities of the employer may be delegated.
OGL
DIEUET
MON DROIT
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
©
Crown copyright
htt/wwugovemen/ublicatons/ational-standards-of-excellence-forheadteachers/headteachers-standards-202
14/14
