Department
for Education
Identifying and supporting
the needs of children and
young people with SEND:
rapid evidence methodology
Technical report
September 2025
Authors: Catherine Antalek, Susana Castro-
Kemp, Fiona Dixon, Rosanne Esposito,
Jessica Hayton, Elisabeth Herbert, Leda
Kamenopoulou, Joanna Kolak, Daisy Loyd,
Amelia Roberts, Anna Melissa Romualdez,
Matthew P. Somerville and Juhayna Taha -
University College London
Government
Social Research
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the members of our advisory board for their insights and support:
Melanie Cunningham, Dr. Johanna Fitzgerald, Dr. Dennis Guiney, Hannah Hamid,
Annamarie Hassall MBE, Professor Chloe Marshall, Dr. Miriam McBreen, Marie Neave,
Professor Tim O'Brien, Taneisha Pascoe-Matthews, Tom Silver, Tom Staniford, Tina
Sode, Professor Jo Van Herwegen, and Richard White. We would also like to thank
Professor Julie Dockrell who provided expert feedback.
In addition, we would like to thank all of the student volunteers and research assistants
who helped with the screening of the titles and abstracts, full text screening, and data
extraction: Alexandra Elliott, Imogen Ip, Yaomin (Raymond) Huang, Xiuhi (Cecile) Li,
Susie Peter, Enxhi Sharxhi, and Frances Tunks.
We also thank the Department for Education for providing valuable feedback throughout
the duration of the project. With special thanks to Laura Hewitson and Camille Van de
Wiele for their guidance and support.
1
Disclaimer
This research does not constitute an endorsement by the Department for Education of
any of the approaches described. It does not reflect current Government policy, nor does
it indicate future policy direction. Materials, resources, websites, and commercially
developed programmes or products mentioned in this report are included solely because
they were identified and reviewed as part of the rapid evidence assessment. Other tools
or products with similar functions may exist and their absence from this report should not
be interpreted as a reflection of their effectiveness. Reference to specific named or third-
party products and materials should not be seen as an endorsement by either the
authors or the Department for Education of their use, or of any particular company or its
offerings.
2
Contents
Acknowledgements
1
Disclaimer
2
List of tables
5
List of figures
6
Executive summary
7
Introduction
8
Background and rationale
8
Research questions
9
Identification and assessment research questions
9
Support and intervention research questions
10
Working with others research questions
10
Scope
11
Methodology
13
Ethical approval
14
Search protocol
14
Inclusion/Exclusion criteria
15
Search results
19
Identification and assessment search results
19
Support and intervention search results
21
Working with others search results
23
Data extraction and appraisal
25
Data extraction
25
Identification and assessment data extraction
25
Support and intervention data extraction
26
Review-level data extraction
26
Intervention-level data extraction
27
Working with others data extraction
28
Quality appraisal
29
Appendices
32
3
Appendix A: Search terms (PICOS criteria)
32
References
37
4
List of tables
Table 1. Studies identified for inclusion in the identification/assessment by SEND
category
21
Table 2. Studies identified for inclusion in the support/intervention strand by SEND
category
23
5
List of figures
Figure 1. PRISMA flowchart for identification/assessment search
20
Figure 2. PRISMA flowchart for support/intervention search
22
Figure 3. PRISMA flowchart for working with others search
24
6
Executive summary
This document reports on the methodology used to approach a series of six evidence
reviews on the best practices in the identification, support, and collaborative practices of
children and young people with SEND aged 0-25 available to teachers and early year
practitioners working in mainstream education in England. These reviews were
commissioned by the Department for Education in the Autumn of 2024.
The evidence informing each review was collected by means of a rapid evidence
assessment (REA). A search of the literature aimed at drawing out key findings for
educational outcomes for children and young people with SEND. The literature search
focused on systematic reviews and meta-analyses evaluating effective tools and
strategies for the identification and support for children and young people with SEND in
mainstream settings as well as reviews evaluating collaborative practices between
families, schools, and healthcare providers or specialists. In total, we retrieved 82 studies
across the areas of SEND informing our identification and assessment strand of the
research, 196 studies informing the support and intervention strand, and finally 58
studies were found to support the evidence around collaborative practices.
Our search efforts prioritised high-quality and relevant research, ensuring the inclusion of
peer-reviewed studies and robust methodologies. All studies identified in the final sample
were either systematic reviews or meta-analyses. To evaluate the quality of these
studies, we used the Assessing the Methodology Quality of Systematic Reviews tool 2
(AMSTAR2) (Shea et al., 2017). Findings suggest that the evidence base is mixed
according to this tool. Most studies were rated as high or moderate confidence in the
results, with some rated as low due to a 'critical flaw'. The typical critical flaw was that
many studies did not conduct a formal risk of bias assessment using a recognised tool
(e.g., ROBINS-I, Cochrane Risk of Bias).
7
Introduction
Background and rationale
The Department for Education (DfE) commissioned our team at the Institute of Education
at University College London (UCL) to produce a series of rapid evidence assessments
(REA) to identify evidence-based practices in mainstream settings for children and young
people with Special Educational Needs and Disabilities (SEND) across 5 key areas: (1)
Social, Emotional, and Mental Health (SEMH), (2) Sensory and/or physical needs, (3)
Cognition and Learning, (4) Autism, and (5) Speech, Language, and Communication
Needs (SLCN). To address identification and support strategies with collaborative
practice that span multiple areas of need, we have also included a sixth report on cross-
cutting themes, which outlines tools and approaches and collaborative practices that can
be used to identify, assess, or support children and young people across more than one
type of SEND.
The current evidence base for supporting children and young people with SEND in
mainstream settings includes a range of valuable resources, though notable gaps
remain. The Education Endowment Foundation (EEF) provides widely used evidence-
based resources such as the Teaching and Learning Toolkit and accompanying guidance
reports. These tools help educators improve practice and learning outcomes through
synthesised research and actionable recommendations. In June 2023, according to the
DfE School and College Panel survey, 24% of primary and secondary teachers working
with pupils with SEND report using the EEF or other academic sources for advice (DfE,
2023). However, the EEF resources offer limited specific recommendations tailored to
teaching children with SEND and do not systematically incorporate input from specialist
professionals. As such, they provide an important but partial foundation for developing
practice in this area.
Beyond the EEF, other non-governmental and non-profit organisations offer guidance
focused on particular areas of SEND, such as NASEN's teacher handbook, the Nuffield
Early Language Intervention, Speech and Language UK's resources, the Autism
Education Trust, and the Royal National Institute of Blind People Curriculum Framework
for Vision Impairment. Government guidance on mental health and wellbeing also
contributes to the broader evidence landscape. These materials offer important
contextual insight but vary in scope, strength of evidence, and accessibility.
Our work follows earlier efforts such as the 2017 DfE-commissioned rapid evidence
assessment, which reviewed support for learners on SEN Support. The MetaSENse
project, funded by the Nuffield Foundation, offers a major contribution by synthesising
international evidence on effective educational interventions for children with SEND in
8
mainstream schools by means of a meta-analysis and also investigates implementation
factors through practitioner interviews. The current reviews extend these contributions by
systematically examining not only support strategies but also the tools and approaches
available to practitioners for the identification and assessment of SEND. In doing so, they
also underscores the importance of collaborative working, identifying when and where
specialist input is needed.
We build on this landscape by conducting a targeted synthesis of best practices in
identification, support, and collaboration for children with SEND, with a particular focus
on strategies that are feasible in mainstream education settings. Importantly, the review
acknowledges areas where evidence remains limited. The absence of strong or
statistically significant findings in some domains should not be interpreted as evidence of
ineffectiveness but rather as an indication that more robust research is required. Taken
together, this review offers a timely and practical addition to the evidence base, directly
aligned with the priorities of practitioners and policy makers.
The evidence summaries for each REA draws on a series of rapid evidence reviews
completed in the Summer of 2025. Each REA synthesises evidence on the best practices
for: (i) identifying the needs of children and young people with SEND, (ii) implementing
effective universal and targeted support strategies, and (iii) fostering collaborative
practices in mainstream educational settings for children with SEND. Findings for each
review were categorised either by need (e.g., 'literacy difficulties' rather than 'Dyslexia')
or by approach (e.g., literacy interventions). The goal of these reviews is to build a robust
evidence base that informs future policy, while providing practical guidance for
mainstream teaching staff to support inclusive education and positive outcomes for all
learners with SEND.
This technical report summarises the approach taken to identify studies discussed in
each of the rapid review reports.
Research questions
Identification and assessment research questions
The aim of the identification and assessment section in each evidence review was to
identify evidence-based formal and informal methods and tools that educational
practitioners (e.g., teachers, teaching assistants, Special Educational Needs
Coordinators (SENCos)) can use to assess and identify specific educational needs of
children and young people. The research questions guiding this strand were as follows:
9
Which formal and informal methods and measurement tools are available to
practitioners to identify different educational needs within diverse classroom
settings?
For which ages or age ranges can these tools be used?
What are the performance parameters of these measurement tools (e.g.,
reliability/validity/specificity)?
How can these tools be used to guide decisions regarding the provision of
universal, targeted or specialist support?
Support and intervention research questions
The aim of the support and intervention section in each review was to identify evidence-
based approaches that effectively support children and young people with a range of
special educational needs and disabilities. This includes universal high-quality teaching
strategies and whole-class or whole-school approaches, as well as targeted and
specialist interventions. The research questions guiding this strand were as follows:
What are the most effective universal and targeted strategies, approaches, or
adaptations for supporting children and young people with SEND to improve
educational outcomes?
What is the most appropriate level of delivery (universal, targeted or
specialist) for each of these interventions?
What specific age groups are targeted by these interventions?
What types of approaches/interventions do children with [x] needs respond best
to?
Working with others research questions
Effective collaborative practices involve coordinated efforts between families, educational
settings, and practitioners. Given the central role of collaboration across both the
identification and intervention processes, this strand is not presented as a standalone
section. Instead, within each review strand, we highlighted where collaborative practices
are necessary and effective, specifically in relation to identification, assessment, support,
intervention planning, and progress monitoring. The research questions guiding this
strand were as follows:
What components and characteristics foster effective collaboration between
teachers, specialists, and parents/caregivers in the identification and support for
children and young people with SEND, and how can clear role boundaries and
knowledge-sharing frameworks support this process?
10
What examples are there of different models of collaboration between the
multidisciplinary team?
Scope
The evidence was collected by means of a rapid evidence assessment (REA); a search
of the literature aimed at drawing out key findings in an area. However, our goal for these
reviews was to provide the most practical and impactful guidance for professionals in
mainstream education. Therefore, to avoid lengthy and unfocused reports, we chose to
include only systematic reviews and meta-analyses.
Our initial search of the literature was designed to be broad to determine the extent of the
evidence base. We identified over 12,000 studies of which we screened titles and
abstracts against our inclusion criteria and identified 336 systematic reviews and meta-
analyses eligible for inclusion, this extensive evidence base provides a strong foundation
for addressing each area of SEND.
The intended audience for these reviews are mainstream educators, and as such, all
findings are framed within their professional remit. Given this focus, the reviews
specifically examine tools, measures, and assessments that can be administered by
mainstream teachers, early years professionals, and/or teaching assistants, excluding
clinical or diagnostic assessments or tools requiring specialist qualifications or training.
The reason for this is that diagnostic-level assessments and assessments for exam
access arrangements are governed by specific guidelines and standards (e.g., The
Specific Learning Difficulty (SpLD) Assessment Standards Committee is a standard-
setting group which promotes good practice and monitors standards for SpLD assessors
and practitioners). Additionally, the administration (and even purchase) of such tools
typically requires specialised training, making them less applicable for use in mainstream
settings. We will, however, include specific recommendations for the circumstances
under which specialist involvement and collaboration is necessary for identification,
assessment, and support.
Additionally, for the support strand in each REA, we narrowed our search to include only
studies that examine educational outcomes (i.e., literacy, writing, maths, and general
attainment) apart from the Speech, Language, and Communication Needs REA, which
also included outcomes related directly to speech, language, and communication. While
is it acknowledged that behavioural outcomes, functional skills, and occupational support
are relevant and often necessary for inclusion and educational success, we maintain a
narrower focus to align with the practitioner-focused aims of the review.
Finally, the review also excludes interventions that require extensive resources beyond
what is typically available in a mainstream classroom, ensuring that all recommendations
11
remain practical, accessible, and feasible for mainstream educators. Specifically, we
refer here to the use of animals, robotics, virtual reality, and augmented reality. Beyond
the financial constraints of these resources, access to animal therapy networks is often
limited in most schools, and while IT solutions can be highly engaging, smaller schools or
those outside academy chains often lack the necessary IT infrastructure and support to
implement these solutions or address issues when they arise. In addition, we will not
review research solely focused on interventions outside the mainstream classroom or
school-setting (e.g., clinical or home-based interventions) and pharmacological
interventions.
12
Methodology
To address our research questions, a Rapid Evidence Assessment (REA) was conducted
following Cochrane rapid review guidance (Garritty et al., 2024). The steps involved in
conducting the rapid reviews included the following:
1. Defining the research questions.
2. Developing a search protocol: Establish a review protocol that outlines the
purpose, inclusion/exclusion criteria, databases to search, and review timelines.
a. These first two steps involved completing a needs assessment with DfE to
establish the specific needs and interests of the SEND reviews as well as
priorities and objectives.
b. We also consulted knowledge users through an advisory board meeting to
help further refine our research questions, eligibility criteria, and outcomes
of interest.
3. Searching for evidence: Conduct a targeted search of academic databases, grey
literature, and relevant sources using specific keywords related to the research
question. In rapid reviews, the search is often restricted to fewer databases and a
more recent time span compared to traditional reviews.
4. Screening studies for relevance: Use a predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria
to screen titles, abstracts, and full-text articles.
5. Data extraction: Extract key data from the selected studies, including study design,
population, intervention details, and main findings.
6. Quality assessment: Assess the quality of included studies.
7. Synthesising findings: Summarise and synthesise the findings in a narrative
format, highlighting the main results and identifying any gaps or inconsistencies in
the evidence.
a. Here we again consulted an advisory board to help with the interpretation
and dissemination of our findings for an audience of educational
practitioners.
8. Report Writing: Prepare a concise report that summarises the key findings and
their implications for practice or policy.
The reviews adhered to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-
Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines for rapid review (Page et al., 2021).
13
Ethical approval
Ethical approval for this project was granted by the Institute of Education's research
ethics board.
Search protocol
To meet the objectives of each REA, we conducted three separate searches (between
October 2024 and November 2024), addressing (1) identification, (2) support and
interventions, and (3) collaboration with others. Rather than conducting separate
searches for each category of need, we developed a unified pool of search terms
incorporating terminology from across all five SEND areas. This ensured consistency and
reduced redundancy across searches. During the title and abstract screening stage, each
reference was reviewed and tagged according to the area of need it addressed based on
its primary focus. This tagging allowed us to assign studies to the appropriate review for
data extraction and synthesis.
Search terms were comprehensive to ensure we captured as much evidence as possible,
and to be able to map the gaps in the literature. The search strategy to identify relevant
papers included two approaches:
1. Database search: After discussion with an information specialist based at the
Institute of Education, two databases most likely to yield relevant literature were
searched for reviews of identification tools and intervention methods (Scopus:
PsychINFO and EBSCO: ERIC). Search strategies for these databases used both
indexing terms and free text searching and were designed for rapid retrieval by
searching titles and records published in English. Search terms were developed
by the team with input from knowledge users and further refined with a specialist
librarian at the Institute of Education to ensure that the terms were balanced for
both sensitivity and specificity. Search terms are comprehensive and follow the
PICOS (Population, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome, Study Type) criteria. The
search terms are listed in Appendix A: Search terms.
2. The following additional sources of grey literature were also searched: Nuffield
Foundation research reports, Education Endowment Foundation completed
projects, What Works Clearinghouse, Council for Exceptional Children, Blueprints
for Healthy Youth Development, Early Intervention Foundation, Evidence for
ESSA/Best Evidence Encyclopaedia, European Platform for Investing in Children,
National Dropout Prevention Centre, British Psychological Society, Nesta, National
Foundation for Educational Research (NFER).
For the support and intervention strand, we initially included search terms related to
different types of intervention outcomes (e.g., behavioural, social, inclusion,
14
communication, and educational). However, given the large volume of papers identified
in our search, we chose to focus on interventions and support strategies that addressed
educational outcomes only, with the exception of the SLCN review which also reported
outcomes in language and communication. Educational outcomes included reading,
writing, maths, science, and general academic attainment.
Inclusion/Exclusion criteria
These inclusion criteria are the specific criteria we set to determine which studies should
be included in the review. These criteria filtered our selection to only the most relevant
and reliable research that addressed our specific research questions to ensure that the
review focused on high-quality evidence that directly informed our topic, making the
findings more accurate and useful. These criteria were applied to each evidence review.
Publication type: We applied a multi-tiered evidence inclusion framework, based
on a hierarchy of evidence, to guide the selection of studies. Systematic reviews
(both qualitative and quantitative) and meta-analyses were prioritised to ensure a
rapid review drawing from high-quality sources.
Publication year: We included studies between 2014-2024 (research since the
publication of the 2014 Children and Families Act and the 2015 SEND code of
practice: 0 to 25 years).
Location and language: No restriction was placed on geographical location, but all
studies were published in English.
Population: Studies that report on students with special educational needs aged
between 0 and 25 years old in mainstream educational settings. Excluding adults
and university or higher education populations. Where participants were children
and young people with SEND, we included studies in which participants were
identified as having SEND based on a pre-existing, independently verified
indicator or diagnosis that classified them within a recognised SEND category.
This could be from a clinical diagnosis of a SEND condition or indicated by an
Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan or a standardised measure (e.g., ADOS).
Studies that use clinical measures to identify participants who may fall within a
SEND category were included, provided these measures were used to
characterise the sample even if they were not standardised tools specifically
designed for participant inclusion within the trial. The rationale for doing this was
that some evaluations may use participants who approach the clinical threshold for
a SEND diagnosis or who may fall into a SEND category on the specific measure
chosen but who may not be considered in this category in an independent
assessment, and this may moderate the reported intervention effect size.
15
Identification and assessment tools: The reviews focused exclusively on tools,
measures, and assessments that can be administered by mainstream educators,
excluding clinical or diagnostic assessments or tools requiring specialist
qualifications or training. The reason for this is that diagnostic-level assessments
and assessments for exam access arrangements are governed by specific
guidelines and standards (e.g., The Specific Learning Difficulty (SpLD)
Assessment Standards Committee is a standard-setting group which promotes
good practice and monitors standards for SpLD assessors and practitioners).
Additionally, the administration (and even purchase) of such tools typically
requires specialised training to reliably administer and interpret results, making
them less applicable for use in mainstream settings. We did, however, include
specific recommendations for the circumstances under which specialist
involvement might be necessary for identification and assessment.
Intervention: We included research focused on (1) identification, (2) support, or (3)
collaborative practices for children and young people with SEND, ensuring direct
relevance to practice in mainstream settings. Studies must have evaluated either
formal or informal identification and assessment methods or examine universal
(e.g., Tier 1¹ or quality first teaching) and targeted intervention approaches (e.g.,
Tier 2 or Tier 3 strategies) that can be implemented within a mainstream
educational setting.
Mainstream context: Studies were included if they were applicable to the UK
mainstream education context. We included interventions and support strategies
that can be implemented in the mainstream classroom. We excluded research
solely focused on tools, assessments, or interventions delivered outside the
mainstream classroom or school-setting (e.g., clinical, or home-based
interventions).
We excluded interventions that were not applicable or feasible within the
UK mainstream educational context (e.g., interventions requiring a
specialised professional that is not typically part of UK school staffing).
We excluded studies assessing medical or pharmacological interventions
without a direct link to educational practice.
Interventions requiring extensive resources that are not typically accessible
to an average mainstream classroom were excluded. Specifically, we refer
here to the use of animals, virtual reality, and augmented reality. Beyond
the financial constraints of these resources, we argue that access to animal
1
The graduated or tiered approach is a framework that describes how support is often provided to children
and young people with SEND. It is from a response to intervention (RTI) and is a structured, multi-tiered
approach to help identify and support struggling students. It focuses on providing high-quality instruction
and interventions, typically at three different levels (i.e., tiers).
16
therapy networks is limited in most schools, and while IT solutions can be
highly engaging, smaller schools or those outside academy chains often
lack the necessary IT infrastructure and support to implement these
solutions or address issues when they arise.
We excluded studies not aligned with UK education policy and procedure.
For example, studies evaluating interventions delivered exclusively within
healthcare settings, or those based on international education systems with
significantly different structures (e.g., U.S. Individualised Education
Programs), were not included.
Outcomes: Interventions identified for all areas of SEND apart from SLCN were
included if they measured and aimed to improve educational attainment or
academic performance outcomes. For example, improved reading ability as
measured using standardised testing (e.g., GCSE's) or reading assessment tools
(e.g., number of words read per minute, ability to read and articulate words etc).
Studies measuring only outcomes that can be considered to be predictors
of educational outcomes (e.g., visuo-spatial or motor abilities have been
linked to mathematical outcomes and vocabulary has been linked to
reading abilities), but not direct measures of educational performance or
attainment were excluded (e.g., intervention studies that focus on
vocabulary training but do not include wider reading outcomes).
Studies that measure educational outcomes using observational protocols
or holistic teacher judgements (e.g., teacher perceptions of improvement),
as opposed to quantitative aggregation of marks from multiple test items
were excluded. This is justified because of various studies showing
systematic bias in teacher assessment in these kinds of studies.
Studies measuring only the following outcomes only were excluded:
Behavioural outcomes (e.g., disciplinary referrals, aggression and
other externalising behaviours, compliance etc.).
Social emotional outcomes (e.g., anxiety, stress, engagement, social
skills, self-esteem, emotion regulation, grit, internalising behaviours
etc.).
Bullying or victimisation outcomes (e.g., experience of bullying,
perpetration of bullying,).
Motivational or attitudinal outcomes when not linked to educational
outcomes (e.g., general view of school or educational setting,
motivation to learn, enjoyment of educational setting or educational
content etc.).
17
Physiological & physical development outcomes (e.g., cortisol, heart
rate, brain activity, motor skills development, physical activity, BMI,
consumption of fruit and vegetables etc.).
School attendance (e.g., rate of attendance over any given time-
period (e.g., number of days attended in a term/academic year).
However, where studies measure multiple outcomes such as behavioural or
mental health outcomes, we recorded these providing that the studies also
measured educational outcomes, the primary focus of the reviews.
We have included language and communication outcomes for papers reporting on
children and young people with SLCN. This was because a small number of
studies that investigated academic outcomes only were identified from our search.
18
Search results
We present here the outcomes of our search, structured around the three distinct
searches we conducted: identification, support and intervention strategies, and
collaborative practices.
Identification and assessment search results
The results of the systematic search for identification and assessment are documented in
a PRISMA flow diagram in Figure 1. Initial database searches yielded 9,734 potential
records across the five SEND areas. The identified records from each SEND area search
were pooled into the Covidence systematic review management platform, where 4,329
duplicate entries were removed resulting in 5,405 unique records. A further 17 were
identified by hand searching the grey literature.
Titles and abstracts of the 5,422 studies were independently reviewed by two
researchers, with exclusions applied sequentially based on the predefined eligibility
criteria. At this stage, studies were tagged according to the specific area of SEND they
addressed (i.e., one of the five review categories). These initial tags were later reviewed
and validated during the full-text screening phase to ensure accurate classification. Any
disagreements regarding the eligibility of specific studies were resolved through
consultation with a third reviewer to ensure consistency and rigour. This resulted in a
total of 516 eligible studies screened for full-text against the inclusion criteria. Full-text
papers were retrieved and independently reviewed by two researchers resulting in a total
of 82 studies included across the five REAs and a sixth cross-cutting themes review
(Figure 1).
Table 1 provides a breakdown of studies informing each review, with 24 studies for
autism, 8 studies for cognition and learning, 11 studies for sensory and/or physical
needs, 21 for SLCN, 15 for SEMH, and 3 studies that were general SEND or across
multiple SEND areas.
19
Figure 1. PRISMA flowchart for identification/assessment search
Studies from databases/registers (n =
9734)
References from other sources (n = 17)
Embase (n = 5410)
Grey literature (n = 17)
PsycINFO (n = 4324)
Identification
References removed (n = 4329)
Duplicates identified manually (n = 15)
Duplicates identified by Covidence (n =
4314)
Marked as ineligible by automation tools
(n = 0)
Other reasons (n = 0)
Studies screened (n = 5422)
Studies excluded (n = 4906)
Studies sought for retrieval (n = 516)
Studies not retrieved (n = 0)
Screening
Studies assessed for eligibility (n = 516)
Studies excluded (n = 434)
Wrong setting (n = 31)
Wrong outcomes (n = 78)
Wrong intervention (n = 32)
Wrong study design (n = 151)
Wrong population (n = 63)
Wrong route of administration (n = 79)
Included
Studies included in review (n = 82)
20
Table 1. Studies identified for inclusion in the identification/assessment by SEND
category
SEND category
Number of studies
Autism
24
Cognition and Learning
8
Sensory and/or Physical Impairment
11
Speech, Language, Communication Needs
21
Social, Emotional, Mental Health needs
15
SEND General or Multiple SEND areas
3
Support and intervention search results
The results of the systematic search for support and intervention are documented in a
PRISMA flow diagram in Figure 2. Initial database searches yielded 7,451 potential
records across the five SEND areas. The identified records were pooled into the
Covidence systematic review management platform, where 2865 duplicate entries were
removed resulting in 4,586 unique records. A further 24 were identified by hand
searching the grey literature.
Titles and abstracts of the 4,610 studies were independently screened by two
researchers, with exclusions applied based on the predefined eligibility criteria. At this
stage, studies were tagged according to the specific area of SEND they addressed (i.e.,
one of the five review categories). These initial tags were later reviewed and validated
during the full-text screening phase to ensure accurate classification. Any disagreements
regarding the eligibility of specific studies were resolved through consultation with a third
reviewer to ensure consistency and rigour. This resulted in a total, 853 eligible studies
screened for full-text against the inclusion criteria. Full-text papers were retrieved and
independently reviewed by two researchers resulting in a total of 196 studies included
across the five REAs and a sixth cross-cutting themes report (Figure 2).
Table 2 provides a breakdown of studies per review, with 65 studies for autism, 54
studies for cognition and learning, 18 studies for sensory and/or physical needs, 16 for
SLCN, 33 for SEMH, and 10 studies that were general SEND or across multiple SEND
areas.
21
Figure 2. PRISMA flowchart for support/intervention search
Studies from databases/registers (n =
7451)
References from other sources (n = 24)
Embase (n = 4475)
Grey literature (n = 24)
PsycINFO (n = 2976)
Identification
References removed (n = 2865)
Duplicates identified manually (n = 45)
Duplicates identified by Covidence (n =
2820)
Marked as ineligible by automation tools
(n = 0)
Other reasons (n = 0)
Studies screened (n = 4610)
Studies excluded (n = 3757)
Studies sought for retrieval (n = 853)
Studies not retrieved (n = 0)
Screening
Studies assessed for eligibility (n = 853)
Studies excluded (n = 657)
Wrong setting (n = 42)
Wrong outcomes (n = 231)
Wrong population (n = 66)
Wrong intervention (n = 137)
Wrong study design (n = 92)
Wrong route of administration (n = 89)
Included
Studies included in review (n = 196)
22
Table 2. Studies identified for inclusion in the support/intervention strand by SEND
category
SEND category
Number of studies
Autism
65
Cognition and Learning
54
Sensory and/or Physical Impairment
18
Speech, Language, Communication Needs
16
Social, Emotional, Mental Health needs
33
SEND General or Multiple SEND areas
10
Working with others search results
The results of the systematic search for working with others are documented in a
PRISMA flow diagram in Figure 3. Initial database searches yielded 4,292 potential
records across the five SEND areas. The identified records were imported into the
removed resulting in 2,796 unique records. A further 8 were identified by hand searching
the grey literature.
Titles and abstracts of the 2,803 studies were independently reviewed by two
researchers, with exclusions applied sequentially based on the predefined eligibility
criteria. Any disagreements regarding the eligibility of specific studies were resolved
through consultation with a third reviewer to ensure consistency and rigour. In total 170
eligible studies were identified (Figure 3).
A breakdown of studies by SEND need is not included here as many studies identified for
inclusion relate to collaborative practices in general SEND provision or across different
areas of need. Full-text papers were retrieved and independently reviewed by two
researchers resulting in a total of 58 studies included across the five REAs and a sixth
cross-cutting themes report.
23
Figure 3. PRISMA flowchart for working with others search
Studies from databases/registers (n =
References from other sources (n = 8)
4292)
Grey Literature (n = 8)
PsycINFO (n = 2300)
Embase (n = 1992)
Identification
References removed (n = 1497)
Duplicates identified manually (n = 20)
Duplicates identified by Covidence (n =
1477)
Marked as ineligible by automation tools
(n = 0)
Other reasons (n = 0)
Studies screened (n = 2803)
Studies excluded (n = 2625)
Studies sought for retrieval (n = 170)
Studies not retrieved (n = 0)
Screening
Studies assessed for eligibility (n = 170)
Studies excluded (n = 112)
Wrong setting (n = 3)
Wrong outcomes (n = 19)
Wrong intervention (n = 3)
Wrong study design (n = 74)
Wrong population (n = 13)
Included
Studies included in review (n = 58)
24
Data extraction and appraisal
Data extraction
Data extraction was completed by trained members of the team. 10% of the included
evidence was extracted independently by two members of the review team to ensure
data extraction was consistent.
Identification and assessment data extraction
For identification and assessment, we extracted descriptive information regarding the
characteristics of each study retrieved from our search as well as characteristics of the
identification tools from the included paper(s) where these were available.
Data extraction framework for studies on identification and assessment tools:
Study ID: Unique identifier for the review
Citation: Author(s), year, title, and full reference
Countries represented: Countries or regions where the studies were conducted
Review type: Specify "Systematic Review," "Meta-Analysis," or "Both"
Aim of study or research questions: Specify the aim of the study or any reported
research questions
Number of included studies: Total number of studies reviewed
References of studies included: Full citations of all the studies that were included
in the final review
Specified age range (month/years) or educational phase: Age range for which the
tool is designed or validated
Number of participants: Total number of participants across studies
SEND type(s) or profile of need addressed: Types of special educational needs
identified or measured (e.g., reading difficulty, attention, behaviour)
Types of studies included: Methodologies of the studies included in the review
RCTs, Quasi-experimental, interviews, etc.
Tool name: Names of the tools and types (e.g., diagnostic test, observation
checklist)
Domains covered: Specific domains and subdomains assessed (e.g., phonology,
attention, memory)
25
Specific skills assessed: Detailed description of the skills measured (e.g.,
vocabulary, grammar, speech sounds)
Type of assessment: Format of the assessment (e.g., parental report, direct
assessment, observation)
Purpose: The stated purpose of the tools (e.g., identification of needs, progress
tracking)
Informant: Who is the tool designed to be used by (e.g., parents, students,
teachers, SENCos)
Performance parameters: Metrics such as reliability, validity, sensitivity, specificity,
and predictive value
Guidance for provision: Insights into how tools inform universal, targeted, or
specialist support
Costs: Purchase/licensing costs and any additional fees (e.g., per-use fees)
User training/qualifications: Required training or qualifications to administer the
tool (e.g., certification, formal workshops)
Tool structure: Detailed description of the tool's format, items, time to administer,
and scoring system where available
Strengths and limitations: Reported strengths or weaknesses of the tools based on
empirical studies
Comparative insights: If more than one tool is compared, comparison of multiple
tools addressing similar needs
Key findings: Major conclusions of the systematic review regarding tool/s utility
and effectiveness.
Support and intervention data extraction
For support and intervention, to accommodate systematic reviews that vary in scope,
with some focusing on a single intervention and others covering multiple interventions,
we used a two-tier data extraction framework. This framework allowed us to capture
overarching review-level details as well as detailed data about individual interventions
within each review where provided.
Review-level data extraction
The review level data captured overarching information about the systematic review or
meta-analysis retrieved from the search.
Data extraction framework for studies on support and intervention at the review level:
26
Study ID: Unique identifier for the review
Citation: Author(s), year, title, and full reference
Countries represented: Countries or regions where the studies were conducted
Review type: Specify "Systematic Review," "Meta-Analysis, "Both" or Other
Aim of study or research questions: Specify the aim of the study or any reported
research questions
Number of included studies: Total number of studies reviewed
References of studies included: Full citations of all the studies that were included
in the final review
Population age: Age groups (e.g., Early Years, Primary, Secondary)
Number of participants: Total number of participants across studies
SEND Type(s) addressed: Types of special educational needs covered in the
review
Specific type of SEND addressed: Specific special educational need if stated
Types of studies included: Methodologies of the studies included in the review
RCTs, Quasi-experimental, interviews, etc.
Intervention type(s): Broad categories (e.g., phonics, assistive technology, peer
mentoring)
Outcome measures: High-level outcomes assessed (e.g., Reading, Math, Writing,
Attainment)
Analysis or synthesis used: Meta-analysis, narrative synthesis, etc.
Summary of findings: Summary of the review's key conclusions about
interventions
Reported effect size(s): Effect sizes of the meta-analysis if this is reported
Intervention-level data extraction
Intervention level data captured detailed information about each intervention reported in
the systematic review. Where a review covers multiple interventions, we extracted data
for each separately where it was provided by the study. We used the Template for
Intervention Description and Replication (TIDieR) framework to describe components of
the interventions (Hoffmann et al., 2014). This framework enables interventions to be
described clearly and comprehensively, in order to support replication and use in
practice. The components of interventions as reported in included studies were extracted
against the following categories.
27
Data extraction framework for studies on support and intervention at the intervention
level:
Review ID: Links the intervention back to the overarching review
Intervention ID: Unique identifier for each intervention
Intervention Name/Description: Name or detailed description of the intervention
Skills Targeted: Specify skills targeted by the intervention (e.g., behavioral,
reading, phonics)
Setting: The settings or contexts in which the intervention occurs. (e.g., small
room, classroom)
Level of Delivery: Universal, Targeted, or Specialist
Rationale: The rationale, theory, or goal of the intervention
What does it involve: Processes or activities involved in the intervention
Materials: Detailed description of any materials used
Who delivers it: Details about who delivered the intervention (e.g., teaching
assistant, specialist)
How is it delivered: The modes of delivery (e.g., in-person, online, group)
Frequency/Dosage: The duration, frequency, and intensity of the intervention
Tailoring: If the intervention was designed to be personalised or adapted for
individual children or users
Fidelity: Adherence to intervention procedures/delivered as intended
Outcome Measure(s): Specific outcomes targeted by the intervention (e.g.,
Reading fluency, Math)
Effectiveness: Effect sizes (if available) or qualitative summary of effectiveness
Cross-cutting potential: Applicability to multiple SEND types (Yes/No, explanation)
Working with others data extraction
Finally, for the working with others strand, we extracted descriptive information regarding
the characteristics of each study retrieved from our search as well as characteristics of
different training or collaborative approaches from the included paper(s) where these
were available.
Data extraction framework for studies on working with others:
28
Review details: Author(s), Year, Title, Journal, Country/Region
Objective of the review: Summary of the review's focus on collaboration, role
boundaries, and training methods
Collaboration components: Key components fostering collaboration (e.g.,
communication protocols, shared planning, goal alignment)
Role boundaries: Characteristics or practices that define clear roles and
responsibilities for teachers, specialists, and parents/caregivers
Knowledge-sharing Frameworks: Frameworks or systems that facilitate effective
sharing of knowledge (e.g., online platforms, regular meetings)
Models of collaboration: Examples of multidisciplinary collaboration models (e.g.,
co-teaching, consultation, integrated service delivery)
Effectiveness of collaboration: Evidence of improved outcomes linked to specific
collaboration models or practices
Training methods for teachers/TAs: Types of training methods or programs used
to prepare teachers and teaching assistants for collaboration (e.g., workshops,
coaching, professional learning communities)
Skills developed through training: Specific skills targeted by training programs
(e.g., communication, teamwork, intervention delivery)
Impact of training: Evidence of how training improves collaboration and targeted
intervention delivery
Challenges in collaboration: Reported barriers or challenges to effective
collaboration (e.g., time constraints, conflicting priorities)
Strategies to overcome challenges: Suggested strategies to address collaboration
challenges (e.g., flexible scheduling, leadership support)
Parent/Caregiver involvement: Approaches to engaging parents/caregivers in
collaboration processes
Relevance to research questions: How the review addresses your specific
questions regarding collaboration, roles, and training
Quality appraisal
To evaluate the quality of each systematic review, we used the Assessing the
Methodology Quality of Systematic Reviews tool 2 (AMSTAR2) (Shea et al., 2017). This
tool includes sixteen domains relating to the research question, review design, search
strategy, study selection, data extraction, and justification for excluded studies,
29
description of included studies, risk of bias, sources of funding, meta-analysis,
heterogeneity, publication bias, and conflicts of interest.
Review authors selected 'yes', 'partial yes', 'no', or 'no meta-analysis conducted' (as
applicable) for each of the sixteen domains:
1. Did the research questions and inclusion criteria for the review include the
components of PICO (Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcome)?
2. Did the report of the review contain an explicit statement that the review methods
were established prior to the conduct of the review and did the report justify any
significant deviations from the protocol?
3. Did the review authors explain their selection of the study designs for inclusion in
the review?
4. Did the review authors use a comprehensive literature search strategy?
5. Did the review authors perform study selection in duplicate?
6. Did the review authors perform data extraction in duplicate?
7. Did the review authors provide a list of excluded studies and justify the
exclusions?
8. Did the review authors describe the included studies in adequate detail?
9. Did the review authors use a satisfactory technique for assessing the risk of bias
(RoB) in individual studies that were included in the review?
a. Randomised controlled trials (RCTs)
b. non-randomized studies of interventions (NRSI)
10. Did the review report on the sources of funding for the studies included in the
review?
11. If meta-analysis was performed did the review authors use appropriate methods
for statistical combination of results?
a. RCTs
b. NRSI
12. If meta-analysis was performed, did the review authors assess the potential
impact of RoB in individual studies on the results of the meta-analysis or other
evidence synthesis?
13. Did the review authors account for RoB in individual studies when
interpreting/discussing the results of the review?
14. Did the review authors provide a satisfactory explanation for, and discussion of,
any heterogeneity observed in the results of the review?
30
15. If they performed quantitative synthesis did the review authors carry out an
adequate investigation of publication bias (small study bias) and discuss its likely
impact on the results of the review?
16. Did the review authors report any potential sources of conflict of interest, including
any funding they received for conducting the review?
The overall confidence in the results of the systematic reviews proposed by the
AMSTAR2 tool is defined as:
High - No, or one non-critical weakness: the systematic review provides an
accurate and comprehensive summary of the results.
Moderate - more than one non-critical weakness but no critical flaws: the
systematic review provides an accurate summary of the results.
Low - one critical flaw, with or without non-critical weaknesses: the systematic
review may not provide an accurate and comprehensive summary of the results.
Critically low - more than one critical flaw, with or without non-critical weaknesses:
the review should not be relied on to provide an accurate and comprehensive
summary of the results.
As per AMSTAR2 guidance, critical domains should be identified for each umbrella
review (i.e., based on domains that are most important for the included reviews under
consideration) and weighted more heavily when rating the overall confidence in the
results of the review, due to their greater effect on the validity of the review findings
(Shea et al., 2017). Based on guidance, we identified six critical domains: protocol
registration; adequacy of literature search; performing risk of bias assessment;
appropriateness of meta-analytical method; consideration of risk of bias when
interpreting the results; and assessment of publication bias (Shea et al., 2017).
31
Appendices
Appendix A: Search terms (PICOS criteria)
We conducted 15 separate searches across five rapid review categories, each focused
on a distinct population: SEMH, SLCN, autism, sensory and/or physical needs, and
cognition and learning. For each population, three searches were performed, focusing
on: identification terms, support terms, and working with others. The intervention,
comparison, and study type remained consistent across all searches, while the
population and outcome terms varied to capture the unique characteristics of each group.
This approach ensured a comprehensive examination of the research literature across
the different populations. PICOS stands for: (1) Population; (2) Intervention; (3)
Comparison; (4) Outcomes; and (5) Study type.
Population:
Population terms: "adolescent" OR child* OR "children and young people" OR kid*
OR "post 16" OR pupil* OR "school aged" OR student* OR teen* OR "young
learner*" OR "young people" OR "young person" OR youth
Educational setting terms: "alternat* educat*" OR class* OR "class* setting" OR
"comprehensive school*" OR "early year*" OR educat* OR elementary OR
"elementary school*" OR "extra-curricular setting*" OR "further educat*" OR
"further educat* setting*" OR "grammar school*" OR "high school" OR "higher
educat*" OR inclus* OR kindergarten OR "learning environment*" OR mainstream*
OR "middle school*" OR nursery OR preschool OR "primary educat*" OR "primary
school*" OR reception OR "remedi* class*" OR "school setting" OR school* OR
"secondary education*" OR "secondary school*" OR "special educat*" OR
"university" OR "whole school" OR "independent school"
General SEND terms: SEND OR SEN OR "special educat* need*" OR "special
need*" OR "learning difficult*" OR "learning disab*" OR "learning difference" OR
"additional need*" OR impair* OR disorder* OR neurodivergent OR "additional
learning need"
SLCN terms: DLD OR "primary language disorder*" OR SLCN OR SLI OR SSD
OR apraxia OR "articulat* disorder*" OR "childhood apraxia of speech" OR "cleft
palate" OR "communicat* disorder*" OR "communicat* impair*" OR "communicati*
dysfunction*" OR "comprehen* difficult*" OR "comprehen* disorder*" OR
"comprehen* impair*" OR "developmental language disorder*" OR disfluen* OR
dysarthr* OR "expressive language" OR "fluency difficult*" OR "fluency disorder*"
OR "grammar difficult*" OR "grammar disorder*" OR "grammar impair*" OR
"language delay*" OR "language development* disorder*" OR "language difficult*"
32
OR "language disabilit*" OR "language disorder*" OR "language impair*" OR
"language need*" OR morpholog* OR morphosynta* OR "phonological disorder*"
OR pragmat* OR "produc* difficult*" OR "produc* disorder*" OR "produc* impair*"
OR "receptive language" OR semantic* OR "specific language disorder*" OR
"speech difficult*" OR "speech disorder*" OR "speech dysfluen*" OR "speech
language communication need*" OR "speech production" OR "speech sound
disorder*" OR stammer* OR stutter* OR synta* OR "vocabulary difficult*" OR
"vocabulary disorder*" OR "vocabulary impair*" OR voice OR "voice disorder*" OR
"voice problem*" OR "word find*" OR "word learn*"
Cognition and learning terms: DCD OR SpLD OR attention OR "cogniti* difficult*"
OR "development* disab*" OR "developmental co-ordination disorder" OR
dyscalcul* OR dyslexi* OR dyspraxia OR "general learning difficult*" OR
"handwriting difficult*" OR "handwriting impair*" OR "learning difficult*" OR "literacy
difficult*" OR "math* anxiety" OR "math* difficult*" OR "mild learning difficult*"
"moderate learning difficult*" OR "numeracy difficult*" OR "profound and multiple
learning difficult*" OR "reading difficult*" OR "reading impair*" OR "severe learning
difficult*" OR "specific learning difficult*" OR "specific learning disab*" OR "writing
difficult*"
Autism terms: autistic OR autism OR "autistic disorder" OR "autisti* spectrum
disorder*" OR "autism spectrum condition" OR "autism spectrum condition*" OR
ASC OR ASD OR "asperger syndrome" OR "child development disorder*
pervasive" OR asperger* OR "pervasive development*" OR "social
communication" OR "pragmatic communication"
SEMH terms: ADD OR ADHD OR EBD OR OCD OR SEMH OR "affect* disorder*"
OR anxiet* OR "anxiety disorder*" OR "attention deficit disorder" OR "attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder" OR "attention deficit*" OR "attention difficult*" OR
"behavior disorder*" OR "behavior problem*" OR "conduct disorder*" OR "conduct
problem*" OR depress* OR "emotion* regulat*" OR "emotional and behavioral
difficulties" OR "emotional disorder" OR "emotional problem*" OR "emotional
symptom*" OR "emotional wellbeing" OR hyperactivity OR inattention OR "mental
disorder*" OR "mental health" OR "mental illness*" OR "mood disorder*" OR
"obsessive compulsive disorder*" OR "oppositional defiant disorder*" OR "peer
relation* problem*" OR "psychiatric disorder*" OR "psychological health" OR
"psychosocial difficult*" OR "self-esteem" OR "self-regulat*" OR "social emotional
and mental health" OR "social emotional*"
Sensory and/or physical needs terms: CVI OR MDVI OR MSI OR PCHL OR
PMLD OR SLD OR "sensory impair*" OR "vis* impair*" OR blind* OR "cerebral
vision impair*" OR "cochlear implant*" OR "cortical vision impair*" OR deaf OR
deafblindness OR "dual sensory impair*" OR "hard of hearing" OR "hearing
impair*" OR "hearing loss" OR "low vision" OR "multi* need*" OR "multi* sensory
33
impair*" OR "multiple disabil*" OR "multiple impair*" OR "permanent childhood
hearing loss" OR "profound deaf*" OR "residual vision" OR "sensory deprivation"
OR "severe deaf*" OR "severe sight impair*" OR "sight impair*" OR "vision loss"
OR "visual disab*"
Intervention:
Identification terms: assess* OR "assessment app*" OR "assessment tools" OR
"behavio* checklist*" OR checklist OR "class* assess*" OR "classroom
observation" OR "cognitive assess*" OR "computer* app" OR "curriculum-based
measure" OR diagnos* OR "dynamic assessment" OR "early screening tools" OR
"educational assessment tool*" OR evaluate OR "formal assess*" OR "formative
assess*" OR "graduated approach" OR identif* OR "informal assess*" OR
measure OR "multi-disciplinary assessment" OR MTSS OR "multi-tiered system of
supports" OR "neuro* assess*" OR observ* OR "parent* report" OR "pupil
observation" OR "response to intervention" OR RTI OR screen* OR "self-
assessment" OR "self-report" OR "smartphone app*" OR "standard* test*" OR
"student observation" OR "tablet app*" OR "teacher judgment*" OR "teacher
observation" OR tool* OR "performance-based"
Support terms: "classroom environment" OR "SEN support" OR "SEND support"
OR SWPBS OR accommodat* OR adaptat* OR approach OR "assistive tech*" OR
"classroom interve*" OR "collaborative teach*" OR curriculum OR "curriculum
adapt*" OR "differentiat* instruction" OR "digital learning" OR "early interven*" OR
"education* program*" OR "education* support" OR "evidence-based interven*"
OR "evidence-informed interven*" OR "exam access arrangement*" OR "exam
accommodat*" OR "graduated approach" OR "group intervention" OR "high-quality
instruct*" OR "high-quality teach*" OR inclus* OR "inclusive education" OR
"inclusive practice" OR "individual support" OR "individual* education plan*" OR
"instruct*" OR interven* OR integrat* OR "mainstream class* support" OR
"mainstream education" OR "mainstream environment" OR "multimedia learning
environment" OR "multi-tiered system* of support" OR "one-to-one" OR "parental
support" OR pedagog* OR "peer support" OR personali*ed OR provision OR
remediat OR "school support service*" OR "school-based" OR "special* interven*"
OR "special* support" OR "specialist teach* support" OR support* OR strateg* OR
"targeted interven*" OR "target* teach* strateg*" OR targeted OR "targeted
support" OR teach* OR "teach* adaptation*" OR "teach* principle*" OR "teach*
strateg*" OR "teach* approach" OR therapy OR "tier 1 interven*" OR "tier 1
support" OR "tier 2 interve*" OR "tier 2 support" OR "tier 3 interven*" OR "tier 3
support" OR treat* OR "universal design" OR "universal interven*" OR "universal
provision" OR "universal support" OR "whole-class support" OR "whole-class
teaching"
34
Working with others terms: collabor* OR parent* OR carer OR caregiver OR famil*
OR specialist* OR "specialist teacher" OR teacher OR educator OR TA OR
"teaching assistant*" OR "support staff" OR "educational psychologist*" OR EP OR
SLT or SLP or "speech and language therapist*" OR "speech and language
pathologist*" OR "speech therapist" OR "speech pathologist" OR "health visitor"
OR HV* OR "Ed Psych" OR counsel* OR "mental health support workers" OR
"child and adolescent mental health service" OR CAHMS OR psychologist* or
therapist* OR "learning support assistant" OR LSA OR "communication support
worker" OR QTOD OR QTMSI OR QTVI OR "co-production" OR "joint working"
OR "healthcare professional" OR "personal carer" OR "occupational therapist"
"Inter-professional collaboration" OR IPC OR expert OR clinician OR nurse
Comparison:
Left blank to include studies without comparison groups
Outcome:
Identification terms: N/A - Not needed for identification terms as there is not
always a specific outcome
Behavioural, Inclusion, Motivation, and Engagement terms: attendance OR
"behavio* outcomes" OR "behavio* regulation" OR "behavio* improvement" OR
"cognitive development" OR "communication skills" OR criminal OR economic OR
employment OR engage* OR financial OR "functional independence" OR
"functional skills development" OR "access to learning" OR "improvement in
learning" OR "inclusive classroom" OR "increase* inclusion" OR "independent
living" OR independent* OR "mental health outcomes" OR motivate* OR offend
OR "prosocial behavio* OR "reduce* learning barriers" OR "reduce* symptom*"
OR "self-regulat*" OR "school performance" OR "school retention" OR "social
inclusion" OR "social-emotional development" OR "teacher perceptions of student
progress" OR "well-being" OR workplace
Educational outcomes (General): "academic achievement" OR "academic
progress*" OR "academic attainment" OR "academic measure" OR "academic
performance" OR "additional learning support*" OR "educat* achievement" OR
"educat* assess*" OR "educat* attainment" OR "educat* measure" OR "educat*
outcome*" OR "educat* performance" OR "educat* progress" "executive function*"
OR "functional skill* develop* OR "improve* learning" OR learn* OR "learning
progress" OR "problem solving" OR "reduced learning barriers" OR "school
outcome*" OR "school performance" OR "school retention"
Literacy outcomes: read* OR literacy OR "letter recognition" OR "letter-sound
knowledge" OR "word reading" OR phonic* OR phonolog* OR "reading
35
comprehension" OR "reading accuracy" OR "reading fluency" OR "reading delay*"
OR "print knowledge" OR decod* OR "alphabet knowledge" OR "listening
comprehension" OR "word recognition" OR "sentence completion"
Writing outcomes: writ* OR literacy OR punctuation OR spelling OR "sentence
writing" OR "free writing" OR "early writing" OR "emergent writing" OR "guided
writing" OR "writing fluency" OR handwriting OR "interactive writing" OR "letter
typing" OR "sentence completion"
Mathematics outcomes: math* OR numer* OR numb* "number sense" OR
arithmetic* OR geomet* OR shape OR calcul* OR algebra OR counting OR
addition OR subtraction OR multiplication OR division OR fractions OR statistics*
OR "place value" OR "math* competenc*" OR "math* concept*" OR "math*
knowledge"
Working with others terms: collaboration* or partnership* or co-practice* or
multidisciplinary* or transdisciplinary or interdisciplinary
Study type:
Review type: review OR "systematic review" OR "meta-analysis" OR "narrative
review"
36
References
DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION. (2023). School and college panel omnibus surveys
for 2022 to 2023. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/school-and-college-
panel-omnibus-surveys-for-2022-to-2023
GARRITTY, C., HAMEL, C., TRIVELLA, M., GARTLEHNER, G., NUSSBAUMER-
STREIT, B., DEVANE, D., & KING, V.J. (2024). Updated recommendations for
the Cochrane rapid review methods guidance for rapid reviews of
effectiveness. bmj, 384
HOFFMANN, T. C., GLASZIOU, P. P., BOUTRON, I., MILNE, R., PERERA, R., MOHER,
D., & MICHIE, S. (2014). Better reporting of interventions: template for
intervention description and replication (TIDieR) checklist and guide. Bmj, 348.
PAGE, M. J., MCKENZIE, J. E., BOSSUYT, P. M., BOUTRON, I., HOFFMANN, T. C.,
MULROW, C. D., & MOHER, D. (2021). The PRISMA 2020 statement: an
updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. bmj, 372.
SHEA, B. J., REEVES, B. C., WELLS, G., THUKU, M., HAMEL, C., MORAN, J., &
HENRY, D. A. (2017). AMSTAR 2: a critical appraisal tool for systematic reviews
that include randomised or non-randomised studies of healthcare interventions, or
both. bmj, 358.
37
Department
for Education
© Department for Education Copyright 2025
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0,
except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit
nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3.
Where we have identified any third-party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
Reference: RR1552
ISBN: 978-1-83870-704-0
For any enquiries regarding this publication, contact www.gov.uk/contact-dfe.
This document is available for download at www.gov.uk/government/publications.
38
