Department
for Education
Identifying and supporting
children and young people
with sensory and/or
physical needs: a rapid
evidence review
Research report
September 2025
Authors: Catherine Antalek, Fiona
Dixon, Jessica Hayton, and Leda
Kamenopoulou - University College
London
Government
Social Research
Disclaimer
This research does not constitute an endorsement by the Department for Education of
any of the approaches described. It does not reflect current Government policy, nor does
it indicate future policy direction. Materials, resources, websites, and commercially
developed programmes or products mentioned in this report are included solely because
they were identified and reviewed as part of the rapid evidence assessment. Other tools
or products with similar functions may exist and their absence from this report should not
be interpreted as a reflection of their effectiveness. Reference to specific named or third-
party products and materials should not be seen as an endorsement by either the
authors or the Department for Education of their use, or of any particular company or its
offerings.
1
Contents
Disclaimer
1
List of tables
4
Executive summary
5
Background
5
Approach
5
Key findings
6
Identification
6
Support
6
Conclusions
7
Introduction
8
Physical and motor difficulties
8
Cerebral palsy
8
Developmental coordination disorder
9
Sensory difficulties
9
Vision impairment
9
Hearing impairment
10
Multi-sensory impairment (deafblindness)
10
Sensory needs often associated with autism
11
Types of sensory and/or physical needs addressed in this REA summary
11
Aims
11
Methods
13
Identification and assessment of need
15
Key considerations for identification of sensory and/or physical needs
18
Identification of sensory needs
22
Identification of physical and motor difficulties
23
Teacher-friendly tools to identify DCD and motor difficulties summary
26
Literacy assessment
26
Identification and assessment summary
27
2
Support and intervention
29
High quality teaching and universal support
30
Physical environment
30
Targeted support
31
Assistive technology
31
Effective assistive technology support approaches summary
33
Augmentative and Alternative Communication
34
STEM (science, technology, engineering, and maths) interventions
34
Effective STEM support for children and young people with sensory and/or
physical impairments summary
39
Literacy interventions
39
Effective literacy support for children and young people with sensory and/or
physical impairments summary
42
Support and intervention summary
43
Conclusions
45
Appendices
47
Appendix A: Search terms (PICOS criteria)
47
References
51
3
List of tables
Table 1. Number of identified studies informing each strand
14
Table 2. Definitions of identification terms in the educational and clinical context
16
Table 3. Number of studies addressing identification and assessment
18
Table 4. Specialists and healthcare providers who may be involved in collaboration
19
Table 5. Number of studies addressing support and intervention
29
4
Executive summary
Background
In the SEND Code of Practice, the area of sensory and/or physical needs includes
children and young people with sensory impairments such as those affecting sight or
hearing, as well as multi-sensory impairment (MSI), which involves combined difficulties
with vision and hearing, and physical disabilities affecting motor skills and coordination
(including both fine motor difficulties such as handwriting and gross motor difficulties).
These children and young people may have difficulties accessing the standard
educational facilities typically available in schools such as classrooms, playgrounds,
libraries, and other shared spaces. Those with sensory and/or physical needs may
require additional support, adaptations, or specialised equipment to use these facilities
effectively.
Sensory and/or physical needs can be age related and may fluctuate over time. Many
children and young people with vision impairment (VI), hearing impairment (HI) or a multi-
sensory impairment (MSI) will require specialist support and/or equipment to access their
learning, or habilitation support. Although some children with sensory and/or physical
needs may also have sensory processing difficulties, given they are commonly
associated with autism, sensory processing difficulties ¹will be addressed in the rapid
evidence review on identifying and supporting the needs of autistic children and young
people. Therefore, sensory processing difficulties will not be examined in this report.
Approach
The evidence was collected by means of a rapid evidence assessment (REA). A search
of the literature aimed at drawing out key findings for children and young people with
sensory and/or physical needs. The literature search focused on systematic reviews and
meta-analyses evaluating effective tools and strategies for the identification and support
for children and young people with sensory and/or physical needs in mainstream settings
as well as reviews evaluating collaborative practices between families, schools, and
healthcare providers or specialists.
1 A sensory impairment refers specifically to a diagnosed impairment of vision, hearing, or multi-sensory function that significantly impacts access to learning.
Sensory processing difficulties, while they may involve atypical responses to sensory stimuli, are not classified as sensory impairments and are more commonly
associated with neurodevelopmental conditions such as autism. See: National Sensory Impairment Partnership (NatSIP,2018)
5
Key findings
Identification
The findings from this review highlight that sensory and/or physical needs are widely
identified and diagnosed by qualified practitioners through specialised clinical and
functional assessment. While there are a few strategies that mainstream educators can
use to identify and screen for difficulties, it is often best to interpret findings with the help
of a specialist. Unsurprisingly, the most effective approach is to carry out a
comprehensive assessment using multiple methods of identification. It is recommended
that these assessments be understood and organised within the International
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) framework, which provides a
holistic view of functioning, participation, and context to measure health and disability
associated with any health condition.
Although there are some evidence-based strategies to support children and young
people with sensory and/or physical needs, the evidence remains limited with a need for
larger-scale studies employing randomised controlled trials. However, a few useful
techniques were highlighted in this REA. Across these systematic and meta-analyses
identified in our REA, several key themes emerged. Positive effects were observed for
maths, reading, and phonological awareness interventions, and the use of assistive
technology for students with communication needs and sensory and/or physical needs.
However, assistive technology, computer-assisted instruction, and the use of some
Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) devices including software,
hardware, apps, and robotics, often requires specialist support from both technology
experts and IT specialists in schools for setup, programming, and troubleshooting.
Support
Multisensory strategies in teaching may help make information more accessible to
children and young people with sensory needs which can help with memory and
encoding. Similarly, in STEM learning there are many forms of substitution, modification,
augmentation, or redefinition to make learning more accessible. However, it is important
that these strategies are meaningful to the task. It is important that educators work with
specialists and healthcare professionals to identify educational needs of students with
sensory and/or physical needs and to design tailored and effective support plans.
The role of the teacher and the individual student are important in delivering effective
interventions. Teaching should be well-planned and differentiated using a range of
multisensory techniques and explicit instruction. Well-informed teachers who engage in
regular reflection of their practice provide more effective provision. Initial teacher training
6
and ongoing development should provide information about sensory and physical needs
of children and young people to support this.
The student should be consulted where targeted intervention is planned to account for
their individual needs, learning goals, and preferences. Materials and strategies that
need substitution, modification, augmentation, or redefinition, should be produced in a
timely manner so that students with sensory and/or physical needs can have equitable
access to learning materials in line with their peers.
However, inconsistencies in study methodologies and outcome reporting highlight the
need for more rigorous research in terms of identification and support of needs of
children and young people with sensory and/or physical needs. While assistive
technologies show promise, greater replication and standardisation are necessary to
confirm their academic benefits. Similarly, computer-assisted instruction (CAI)
interventions appear useful for students with vision impairments but require better
implementation strategies and educator involvement.
Conclusions
Overall, there is a growing body of evidence on identifying and supporting children and
young people with sensory and/or physical needs from which we can draw some
preliminary conclusions about best practices for mainstream educators. However, many
studies are still very small-scale or low in quality which limit the degree to which we can
generalise some of this evidence. Further research is needed to validate these strategies
with a representative sample participant and also to evaluate other tools of identification
and support that educators without specialist qualifications can use in mainstream
settings.
7
Introduction
In England, during the 2024/25 academic year, approximately 1.44 million pupils with
identified special educational needs (SEN) are educated in mainstream state-funded
primary and secondary schools (DfE, 2025).
As of 2025, 1.8% of pupils receiving SEN support and 3.3% of those with an Education,
Health and Care (EHC) plan have physical disabilities recorded as their primary need.
For hearing impairment, the figures are 1.5% on SEN support and 1.4% with an EHC
plan. Vision impairment is recorded in 0.8% of pupils on SEN support and 0.9% of those
with an EHC plan, while multi-sensory impairment is less common, affecting 0.3% of
pupils on SEN support and with an EHC plan. Due to the relative low incidence of these
needs, schools may have limited experience in supporting children with these types of
need. The impact of coordination, sensorimotor difficulties, or impairment of the senses
can affect the learning, cognition, and emotional well-being of children and young people.
Diagnoses are highly comorbid with other types of SEND (20-80%) and are associated
with difficulties in working memory, phonological processing, executive function, and
inattention, leading to large variation in symptoms and routes to identification and
support.
While a wide range of physical, motor, and sensory needs fall under this SEND category,
our review will focus on the primary needs identified in the studies retrieved from our
search. These conditions and needs are briefly defined and examined in the following
sections.
Physical and motor difficulties
Children and young people with physical and motor difficulties may face challenges with
movement, coordination, strength, and endurance, which can impact their ability to fully
participate in learning and daily school activities. Difficulties with gross motor skills, such
as whole-body movement, balance, and coordination, can affect walking, running,
maintaining posture, and engaging in playground activities. Similarly, fine motor
challenges may interfere with writing, cutting, fastening clothing, and using tools like
pencils, scissors, or keyboards. These difficulties can limit participation in key
developmental activities, including leisure and play, functional tasks, academic work, and
social interactions (Wang et al., 2009).
Cerebral palsy
Cerebral palsy (CP) is the most common motor impairment affecting children. CP is a
neurological condition that affects movement, muscle tone, and coordination (Mutch et
8
al., 1992). It is caused by damage to the developing brain, usually before, during, or
shortly after birth. CP is a lifelong condition, and its severity can vary widely across
individuals. Some individuals may have mild motor difficulties, while others experience
significant physical and mobility challenges.
Cerebral palsy can impact educational outcomes in several ways. Motor impairments
may affect a child's ability to write, use classroom equipment, or participate in physical
activities. Communication may also be affected, particularly if muscles involved in speech
are impacted. Some children with CP have associated learning difficulties, sensory
difficulties, behavioural disorders, and the presence of seizures (Michelsen et al., 2005).
Developmental coordination disorder
Developmental coordination disorder (DCD), sometimes referred to as Dyspraxia, is
neuromotor condition characterised by motor impairment which is not due to intellectual
disability or any specific congenital or acquired neurologic condition (Blank et al., 2012)
The estimated prevalence of DCD ranges from 5% to 6% internationally (Blank et al.,
2019). While DCD is primarily classified as a specific learning difficulty under cognition
and learning in the SEND Code of Practice (DfE, 2015), given its link to physical and
motor challenges, we have chosen to address DCD in this rapid evidence assessment
(REA). However, DCD may also affect processing speed and written expression as well
as verbal and non-verbal communication. In addition, DCD often co-occurs with other
developmental disorders, most commonly attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
(Piek and Dyck, 2004).
Children and young people with DCD may demonstrate poor balance, clumsiness, and
difficulty with spatial awareness. The acquisition and function of motor skills is often
below expectations for their age.
Sensory difficulties
Vision impairment
Vision Impairment (VI) is an umbrella term for a range of vision difficulties resulting from
acquired or congenital monocular, binocular, or brain-based conditions that cannot be
corrected by prescription lenses (World Health Organization, 2023). The risk of childhood
VI is associated with factors such as prematurity, low birthweight, economically deprived
backgrounds, poor maternal health, and learning difficulties.
Children with VI often demonstrate developmental delays, particularly in movement, as
non-visual sensory inputs do not provide sufficient spatial, directional, and motivational
9
information. Domains impacted by childhood VI include visual functioning, cognitive
implications (such as spatial awareness and depth perception), motor development,
language, social interaction and play, self-concept and self-esteem, and other areas like
sleep, education, leisure, social development, and health. There may also be fewer
opportunities for incidental learning (e.g., observing others).
Hearing impairment
Hearing impairment (HI) refers to the permanent, partial or total inability to hear sounds in
one or both ears. HI ranges from mild to profound and can affect speech perception,
spoken language acquisition, and overall auditory processing. Within this category,
individuals who are deaf typically have little to no functional hearing and may rely on sign
language, lip reading, or assistive technology for communication. Those who are hard of
hearing (HH) have some residual hearing that can often be supported with hearing aids,
cochlear implants, or other assistive listening devices. The degree and nature of hearing
impairment can vary widely depending on factors such as the age of onset, severity, and
whether it is congenital or acquired.
Risk factors for hearing impairment in children include genetic factors, exposure to loud
noises, certain infections, and complications during birth (Olusanya et al., 2014). Hearing
impairment can lead to developmental delays in speech and language, social skills,
academic performance, and emotional well-being. Children with hearing impairments, for
example children who are deaf, often experience limited or altered access to spoken
language, as speech perception can be challenging and may impact speech production
skills and speech intelligibility (Spencer et al., 2011). Some children with hearing
impairments (e.g., those with difficulty acquiring spoken language) may also experience
difficulties with literacy (Mayer and Trezek, 2017) which may impact educational
outcomes (Appelman, 2012).
Multi-sensory impairment (deafblindness)
Children and young people with multisensory impairment (MSI) experience impairments
in both sight and hearing, and many also have medical conditions or physical disabilities
(e.g., Kamenopoulou, 2022). While a very small number are completely blind and deaf,
most have some useful vision and/or hearing. Deafblindness is defined as a combined
sight and hearing impairment that causes difficulties with communication, access to
information, and mobility, and it includes those with progressive sight and hearing loss
(Department of Health, 1995).
MSI can affect development in several ways, including limited communication, distorted
perception of the environment, limited capacity to anticipate events and outcomes, lack of
basic extrinsic motivation, and developmental delays due to medical conditions. These
10
challenges impact various domains such as acquiring information and building world
knowledge, expressing, and receiving messages, moving around independently
(orientation and mobility), emotional development (self-confidence and motivation), and
social development (social skills, interactions, and relationships) (McInnes and Treffry,
1982, Kamenopoulou, 2012). Addressing the needs of children and young people with
MSI requires a comprehensive approach that integrates support across these domains to
ensure their overall development and well-being.
Sensory needs often associated with autism
Our Autism Report provides some discussion of sensory needs often associated with
autism. Sensory processing disorder (SPD) can be linked to autism and ADHD, but all
people have a sensory profile, especially those who are neurodivergent. Sensory
response can be hypersensitivity (over-responsiveness), hyposensitivity (under-
responsiveness), or a combination of both. Environments can be overstimulating (i.e.,
with multiple visual, auditory or tactile input) and can lead to sensory overload or anxiety,
exhaustion, or burnout (Autism Speaks, 2024).
Types of sensory and/or physical needs addressed in this REA summary
Cerebral palsy
Development Coordination Disorder (also referred to as dyspraxia)
Vision impairment
Hearing impairment
Multi-sensory impairment
Aims
The goal of this rapid review was to synthesise evidence-based strategies for the (1)
identification, (2) support, and (3) collaborative practices available to mainstream
teachers in supporting children and young people with sensory and/or physical needs.
Our research questions were as follows;
Identification:
Which formal and informal methods and measurement tools are available to
practitioners to identify sensory and/or physical needs within diverse classroom
settings?
11
For which ages or age ranges can these tools be used?
What are the performance parameters of these measurement tools (e.g.
reliability/validity/specificity)?
How can these tools be used to guide decisions regarding the provision of
universal, targeted or specialist support?
Support:
What are the most effective universal and targeted strategies, approaches, or
adaptations for supporting children and young people with sensory and/or physical
needs to improve educational outcomes?
What is the most appropriate level of delivery (universal, targeted or
specialist) for each of these interventions?
What specific age groups are targeted by these interventions?
What types of approaches/interventions do children with sensory and/or physical
needs respond best to?
Working with others:
What components and characteristics foster effective collaboration between
teachers, specialists, and parents/caregivers in the identification and support for
children and young people with sensory and/or physical needs, and how can clear
role boundaries and knowledge-sharing frameworks support this process?
What examples are there of different models of collaboration between the
multidisciplinary team?
12
Methods
To address these research questions, a Rapid Evidence Assessment (REA) was
conducted following Cochrane rapid review guidance (Garritty et al., 2024). This REA
followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis
(PRISMA) statement when selecting relevant articles.
We conducted a targeted search in October 2024 of two academic databases (i.e.,
Scopus: PsychINFO and EBSCO: ERIC) as well as grey literature using specific
keywords related to the research questions (see Appendix A: Search terms). We
identified systematic reviews and meta-analyses published in English between 2014 and
2024, focusing on children and young people aged 0-25 with identified physical or
sensory impairments in mainstream educational settings. Included studies evaluated
identification, support, or collaborative practices that are feasible in UK educational
settings, excluding medical, home-based, or highly resource-dependent interventions
(e.g. beyond what is typically available in a mainstream classroom such as animals,
robotics and virtual reality). Included studies could be UK-based or international but had
to be relevant to the UK educational context (e.g., a study examining the role of
classroom-based occupational therapists in mainstream schools may not be relevant, as
this model of in-school provision is not routinely available within the UK education
system). Identification tools had to be usable by mainstream staff (not clinicians), and
SEND status were independently verified through diagnosis, EHC plan, or standardised
measures. Studies relying solely on teacher judgement or reporting only behavioural,
emotional, physical, or motivational outcomes were excluded. Only studies reporting
measurable educational attainment outcomes were included.
Titles and abstracts were initially screened for relevance by trained members of the team,
followed by full-text review. This resulted in the inclusion of 29 studies in the final review,
with 11 studies on identification and assessment, and 18 studies on support and
intervention (see Table 1). Given the central role of collaboration across both the
identification and intervention processes, this strand is not presented as a standalone
section. Instead, within each review strand, we highlight where collaborative practices are
necessary and effective. Additionally, as many studies identified for inclusion relate to
collaborative practices in general SEND provision or across different areas of need, a
breakdown of studies specific to sensory and/or physical needs is not included here, with
collaborative practices across the categories of SEND addressed in the Cross-Cutting
Themes Report.
13
Table 1. Number of identified studies informing each strand
Strands
Number of studies included
Identification and assessment
11
Support and intervention
18
Total
29
Data from each study were then extracted by trained members of the team. We extracted
descriptive information regarding the characteristics of each study as well as information
about identification tools and support strategies from the included paper(s) where
available.
Our search efforts prioritised high-quality and relevant research, ensuring the inclusion of
peer-reviewed studies and robust methodologies. All studies identified in the final sample
are either systematic reviews or meta-analyses. To evaluate the quality of these studies,
we used the Assessing the Methodology Quality of Systematic Reviews tool 2
(AMSTAR2) (Shea et al., 2017). Findings suggest that the evidence base is mixed
according to this tool. Most studies were rated as high or moderate confidence in the
results, with some rated as low due to a 'critical flaw' (detailed in our Technical Report).
The typical critical flaw was that many studies did not conduct a formal risk of bias
assessment using a recognised tool (e.g., ROBINS-I, Cochrane Risk of Bias).
A full account of our methodology including search terms, inclusion, and exclusion
criteria, PRISMA flow diagram, extraction variables, and quality appraisal can be found in
our Technical Report.
14
Identification and assessment of need
The aim of this section is to review the studies identified in our search that focused on
identification and assessment strategies suitable for use by mainstream education
professionals in identifying the needs of children and young people with sensory and/or
physical impairments.
It is important to emphasise that subject and class teachers are not responsible for the
formal identification or assessment of learners' needs. In line with the SEND Code of
Practice (Department for Education & Department of Health and Social Care, 2015), their
role is to support the early recognition of students who may be experiencing difficulties,
particularly those affecting educational progress. Therefore, these approaches reviewed
in this REA are not intended to diagnose any conditions, but they can help mainstream
educators in recognising children and young people's strengths and challenges to guide
decisions about support or to highlight cases where referral for specialist assessment
may be warranted. Where concerns are identified, these should be discussed with the
school's Special Educational Needs Coordinator (SENCo) and the child's family to
determine appropriate next steps, including referral and formal assessment where
necessary.
Further, although many screening and assessment tools may be effective at identification
and needs-based assessment, these tools should be interpreted with caution by
mainstream educators without specialist qualifications. This is because many screening
tools and assessments are founded on psychometric principles (e.g., reliability, validity,
and standardisation) which determine how the results should be interpreted and used.
Without specific training in these areas, it may be difficult to interpret how scores
compare to typically developing populations, whether they represent meaningful results,
or what it means when scores fall within clinical ranges. In practice, this ambiguity places
greater reliance on professional judgment, which can lead to variability in how results are
interpreted, particularly among assessors with less experience or limited training. While
educators play a vital role in completing these tools as informants, accurate interpretation
should typically be assisted by an individual with specialist training. While the strategies
detailed in this REA can be useful for intervention planning or flagging potential issues,
they should not be used for labelling or identifying specific personality traits or diagnosis.
Rather, these tools should be used to identify critical areas of need that may impact a
student's academic performance.
The purpose of identification is to verify the existence of an educational need, while
assessment aims to characterise the nature and extent of the child's difficulties in terms
of differing skills (e.g., cognitive, language, literacy) (McCauley, 2001). The terms
'identification', 'screening', 'assessment', and 'profiling' are often used inconsistently
across research, policy, and practice and can have different meanings in relation to
15
educational versus clinical practice. For example, the term 'screening' in an educational
context typically refers to the process by which a tool or a strategy is used to flag
potential needs in a population (e.g., whole-school or whole-class) to provide timely
support or targeted interventions in educational settings. In contrast, screening for clinical
purposes is typically carried out by health or mental health professionals using
standardised tools to determine whether a child meets criteria for a specific diagnosis,
such as DCD, with the goal of planning for further assessment or clinical treatment.
However, some processes may overlap. For example, a functional vision assessment
could be used by educational staff to help identify visual processing difficulties that may
impact classroom learning, or it could be used as part of a formal assessment by a
specialist teacher or clinician to inform decisions around access arrangements or
assistive technology, or to monitor a pupil's progress in adapting to visual supports or
mobility training. For clarity throughout this document, we define each term within an
educational context. Definitions of terms are provided in Table 2.
Table 2. Definitions of identification terms in the educational and clinical context
Term
Educational use
Clinical use
Needs-based
The process of recognising that a child
Not a formal clinical term;
identification
may have additional needs (whether
overlaps with early signs
they do or do not have a diagnosis),
that may prompt
often based on parental or child
diagnostic referral but is
concern, observations, or professional
not sufficient for
judgement. However, this process can
diagnosis.
also include informal assessments.
Informal assessments are flexible
methods of gathering data to identify
areas of need, guide interventions and
monitor progress. These tools include
checklists, questionnaires, or more
structured assessments (e.g., listening
comprehension, reading fluency).
16
Term
Educational use
Clinical use
Screening
A brief, tool or procedure used to flag
Tools used to determine
or identify potential concerns across a
whether further
population. In educational contexts, the
diagnostic assessment is
goal is to flag potential needs early so
warranted, often as a first
that timely support or targeted
step in a medical or
interventions can be put in place within
psychological evaluation
the school setting. However, given that
pathway. Typically, these
screeners are typically quick to
tools should be
complete and usually measure only a
administered by a trained
specific area of concern, they should
specialist.
be interpreted with caution.
Assessment
Refers to a systematic structured
A systematic and
process of data gathering from
structured process of
standardised tools to understand
data collection for
individual strengths and needs in order
diagnostic purposes.
to plan intervention or monitor
Assessment is conducted
progress. For educational purposes,
by specialists (e.g.,
these can be informal or formal
educational
assessments.
psychologists) and
Formal assessments are structured,
involves standardised
standardised tools used to evaluate a
diagnostic tools to
student's performance against national
determine specific
or normative standards. These include
conditions or
GCSEs and A-levels but also
developmental profiles.
standardised assessments of literacy
or other types of skills. Formal
assessments sometimes require input
from specialists to administer and/or
interpret results.
Profiling
A holistic summary of a child's
Less commonly used as
functioning, strengths, and areas of
a standalone concept;
difficulty, often used to guide provision.
elements of profiling are
Includes data from multiple informants
embedded in
and through multiple methods.
comprehensive
diagnostic assessments
that explore functional
impact across domains.
17
These approaches can help teachers and school staff in recognising students' strengths
and challenges, guide decisions about support, or highlight cases where referral for
specialist assessment may be warranted. Of these 11 studies on identification and
assessment, 3 addressed hearing impairment, and 8 covered physical and motor
difficulties (including DCD) (see Table 3). No studies were found for vision or multi-
sensory impairment.
Table 3. Number of studies addressing identification and assessment
Area of Need
Number of Studies
Vision Impairment
0
Hearing Impairment
3
Physical and Motor Difficulties (including DCD)
8
Multisensory impairment
0
The path to identification and support for children and young people with sensory and
physical needs is typically initiated through medical channels. Concerns may first be
raised by parents, teachers, or healthcare professionals who notice signs such as
difficulties with vision, hearing, movement, or coordination. Here, signs of challenges
might include delayed gross motor milestones (e.g., difficulty walking, poor balance), fine
motor challenges (e.g., difficulty holding a pencil, using scissors, or fastening buttons),
clumsiness or coordination difficulties (e.g., struggling with PE, frequent tripping), fatigue,
pain, or posture issues that affect participation. Parents may notice signs of vision
impairment, such as lack of eye contact, delayed tracking, or sensitivity to light. They
may also notice signs of hearing impairment such as delayed speech development,
inattentiveness, or difficulty responding to sounds.
Key considerations for identification of sensory and/or
physical needs
The SEND Code of Practice (Department for Education & Department of Health and
Social Care, 2015) highlights the importance of parents' early observations and notes
that signs of complex developmental or sensory needs can be identified in early
development through methods such as health assessments, assessments via the Early
Years Foundation Stage Profile, and formal progress checks (e.g., two-year development
reviews). The UK also has a universal newborn hearing screening programme. Early
concerns often lead to a referral to healthcare professionals, such as a general
practitioner (GP) or directly to paediatric services. From there, the child is usually
assessed by specialists; this might include audiologists for hearing impairments,
18
ophthalmologists for vision impairments, Occupational Therapists (OT) for difficulties with
fine motor skills (e.g., handwriting, self-care tasks), or Physiotherapists may be consulted
for concerns about mobility, strength, coordination, or chronic pain.
Health professionals must inform parents if they believe a child under compulsory school
age has SEND, notify the local authority, and offer support, including signposting to
relevant organisations. Early support may involve home visits from specialists, parent
training, and structured home-based programmes. In addition to the formal checks, early
years practitioners working with children should monitor and review the progress and
development of all children throughout the early years.
A diagnosis is generally made by a medical professional, based on clinical testing and
observations. Ongoing support typically involves multidisciplinary collaboration, bringing
together health and education professionals to coordinate care and ensure that
adaptations, equipment, and tailored support are provided in both educational and home
settings. Because of its grounding in clinical assessment and medical terminology, this
route is generally more medicalised than pathways for many other types of special
educational needs (Farrell, 2006). See Table 4 for a list of specialists and healthcare
professionals who may be involved in the identification and support processes for
children and young people with sensory and/or physical needs.
Table 4. Specialists and healthcare providers who may be involved in collaboration
Specialist
Role
Audiologist
Conducts hearing assessments. Diagnoses hearing
loss and recommends hearing aids or other devices
Clinical Psychologist /
Supports cognitive and functional assessments;
Educational Psychologist
explores emotional impact of sensory/physical needs
Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT)
Investigates medical causes of hearing issues. May
Specialist
recommend surgery or further medical treatment
Neurologist
Assesses neurological causes of physical or sensory
difficulties
Occupational Therapist (OT)
Assesses fine motor skills, daily living skills, and
sensory processing. Recommends adaptations to
support functional independence
Ophthalmologist
Diagnoses vision impairments and prescribes
treatments or corrective lenses
19
Specialist
Role
Optometrist
Performs vision tests and prescribes glasses.
Identifies functional vision issues
Orthopaedic Surgeon
May assess structural or musculoskeletal conditions
(e.g., scoliosis, joint issues)
Orthoptist
Assesses and treats eye movement and coordination
issues
Paediatrician
Coordinates assessment of complex developmental
or physical needs. Screens for conditions like
cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy, or global
developmental delay
Physiotherapist
Assesses movement, posture, and muscle function.
Designs physical therapy programmes to support
mobility and motor development
Speech and Language
May be involved where motor needs affect speech
Therapist (SLT)
production (e.g., DCD, cerebral palsy, hearing
impairment)
Specialist Nurses (e.g.,
Provide health monitoring, care planning, and parent
Community Children's Nurses,
support for long-term conditions
Epilepsy Nurse)
Teacher of the Deaf (ToD)
Educational specialist who supports children with
hearing loss in accessing the curriculum
Teacher of the Visually
Supports access to learning materials and the
Impaired (QTVI)
environment for children with vision impairment
The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) is a framework
developed by the World Health Organisation (WHO), which provides a comprehensive
and standardised way of understanding health conditions, disabilities, and their impact on
daily life. The ICF is particularly useful in the assessment and identification of physical
and sensory impairments in children as it provides a holistic approach. It considers not
only the medical diagnosis but also the functional abilities, activity limitations, and
participation restrictions a child may experience in various contexts such as school,
home, and community settings. Typically, both clinical and functional assessments are
used to inform tailored support programmes and may feed directly into the process of
obtaining an EHC plan.
The ICF explicitly includes activities of daily living (ADLs) and activities and participation
as a key part of its framework. ADLs are typically assessed in the process of
20
identification and diagnosis. Assessment of capacity in ADL should comprise a
representative set of items from all three domains of ADL: 'self-care and self-
maintenance', 'productivity and schoolwork' and 'leisure and play' (Sugden, 2006).
Activities and participation are also often assessed. These include barriers to
participation in different contexts including in educational environments. Insight into ADLs
and activities and participation are essential for diagnosis and treatment planning.
The 'F-words' are a child-friendly and family-centred way to apply the principles of the
ICF (Gonzalez Lopez et al., 2023). They were introduced by Rosenbaum and Gorter
(2012) to shift the focus from a deficit-based model of disability to a more holistic,
strengths-based approach. The F-Words can be used to guide identification and support
and support collaboration with parents and children and young people.
The six 'F-words' used to guide identification and support are:
Function: What the child can do (not what they can't); emphasises activities rather
than limitations
Family: The essential environment for a child's development and well-being
Fitness: Physical activity, health, and well-being
Fun: Enjoyment, play, and activities that are meaningful to the child
Friends: Relationships and social development
Future: Setting goals, growing up, and planning for the child's life ahead
Although our review found relatively few studies focused on non-clinical methods of
identification and assessment, several practical strategies emerged that educators could
use to better identify and support children and young people with physical and sensory
impairments in educational settings. This review highlights several tools and strategies
that mainstream educators can use to help recognise strengths and challenges to
coordinate support or refer for further assessment.
In general, identification of needs should be a collaborative effort with a multidisciplinary
team. While some tools can be administered or completed by teachers or other
educational staff, these tools often require specialist input to interpret the results and help
to make suggestions for support. Further, risk assessments and professional advice
(e.g., from OTs, physiotherapists, or VI specialists) can also guide reasonable
adjustments and support. It is also important to note that most studies in our review
emphasise the need for a multi-method assessment approach, combining different tools
(e.g., physical examinations, observations, and structured interviews) within each area of
concern to ensure a comprehensive evaluation.
21
Identification of sensory needs
Many methods of identification and diagnosis of vision and hearing impairments are
administered and interpreted by specialists or trained healthcare professional and
therefore will not be reviewed here. However, there are a few things teachers may do to
flag concerns. Our search resulted in three systematic reviews addressing the
identification and assessment of children and young people with hearing impairments
(one of these studies is discussed in the literacy assessments section). However, no
studies were found that addressed the identification and assessment strategies available
to mainstream educators of children and young people with vision impairments or multi-
sensory impairments.
Stefánsdóttir et al. (2023) investigated the measures and methods that have been used
when examining the speech intelligibility of children and young people with hearing
impairments aged 6 months to 31 years. Speech intelligibility refers to how clear a
person's speech is, or how much of a person's speech is understood by a listener
(Spencer et al., 2011). Speech intelligibility may be important to measure in children with
hearing impairments who use spoken language as part/all of their communication system
to evaluate intervention progress when connected speech is the goal (Coppens-Hofman
et al., 2016; Ertmer, 2011). Speech intelligibility is measured by how speech is produced
by the speaker and how it is perceived by the listener (McLeod, 2020). Speech
intelligibility may be determined by various aspects of spoken language such as speech
perception, phonological knowledge, and motor control of articulation, timing, and
intonation (Freeman, 2018). However, speech intelligibility may also be determined by
factors related to the listener such as their relationship with the speaker, the speaker's
native language, and the listener's attitudes and understanding of communication
patterns and those that may be involved in communication disorders or hearing
impairments (McLeod, 2020).
Stefánsdóttir et al. (2023) identified 204 studies reporting on a speech intelligibility
measure used by a range of different listeners including audiologists, naïve listeners
(e.g., has no specialist training in speech, language, or communication disorders)
parents, Speech and Language Pathologists/Therapist students, and other
professionals. The most common subjective rating scale was the Speech Intelligibility
Rating scale (SIR) (Allen et al., 2001). Two of the most commonly used objective
measures of speech intelligibility were the Percentage of Consonants Correct (PCC) and
the Beginners' Intelligibility Test (BIT).
1. The SIR is a five-point rating scale that measures the level of speech intelligibility
(i.e., the ease of understanding), with reference to everyday situations. This
measure can be used for children and young people of all ages.
22
2. PCC is used for children and young people aged 3 and older and estimates the
severity of speech sound disorders by calculating the proportion of correctly
produced consonants in a speech sample.
3. BIT is used for children between the ages of 4 and 9 and is a sentence repetition
task designed for young children with hearing impairments; listeners transcribe
short, familiar sentences and accuracy is scored as the percentage of words
correctly transcribed.
This systematic review did not compare the effectiveness of different scales but did
report the most commonly used measures. Additionally, it was unclear which
assessments were used by which types of listeners, although naive listeners were used
in 33 of the 204 included studies. Therefore, it is not possible to conclude whether these
three assessments can be used independently by mainstream educators, and it is
recommended that administration and interpretation is supported by a speech and
language therapist.
Questionnaires have been identified as one low-cost method of screening for hearing
impairments in children and young people (e.g. Newton et al., 2001). Muñoz et al. (2015)
explored the effectiveness of parent or teacher-completed questionnaires developed by
researchers in screening for permanent hearing loss in school-aged children. Findings
suggested mixed results in effectiveness where half of the study authors of the studies
included in this review recommended the use of the developed questionnaire tool and
half did not recommend questionnaires. Thus, the authors ultimately concluded that there
is currently insufficient evidence that parent or teacher-completed questionnaire
screening can be used to identify children in need of further hearing assessment.
There is a clear need for validated screening tools that can reliably be used by educators
as part of school-based monitoring of vision and hearing impairments.
Identification of physical and motor difficulties
A diagnosis of developmental coordination disorder (DCD) before the age of 5 is typically
not recommended as there may be spontaneous recovery in young children with motor
delay, a possible lack of cooperation to perform motor evaluations, and the age-
dependent variability for the acquisition of skills necessary for daily life activities (Blank et
al., 2019). However, signs of DCD or motor impairment may occur early in development.
Four studies included in our review addressed the identification and assessment of
children and young people with DCD.
Lee and Zwicker (2021) reviewed the evidence supporting early identification of DCD
(i.e., before age 5). Their review suggests there is emerging evidence that children,
23
particularly those at higher risk of DCD, can be identified before starting school, enabling
earlier intervention that may improve developmental outcomes and reduce secondary
difficulties. Health professionals are encouraged to use the term "at risk of DCD"
explicitly. However, it is important to note that many of the questionnaires currently used
to assess DCD have not yet been fully validated for use as general screening tools in
mainstream settings. Further research is needed to confirm their reliability and accuracy
before they can be confidently used to identify children who may require additional
support. Although these studies involved children pre-school aged, these findings
suggest with further research there may be scope for children to enter school with a
diagnosis of DCD or be considered 'at risk' which could help to support further support
plans and school-based interventions.
González López et al. (2023) investigated the early signs of impairment in body functions
and structures, activities, and participation in children with or at risk of DCD between the
ages of 0 and 6 years. They reviewed what types of features are typically measured, and
who the informant is. They found that most parents observed differences in motor level
before the age of 4. However, the diagnosis tends to occur over two years after families
first report these differences. Further, in most studies, the parents are the informants,
meaning they are the ones that complete the assessments. These findings highlight the
important role of including families in the identification and diagnostic processes and in
the subsequent support plan. Therefore, mainstream educators may consider working
directly with parents in the assessment of these domains.
Bieber and colleagues (2016) systematically reviewed manual function outcome
measures for children with DCD aged 3-18 years. They found that several questionnaires
that can be used by teachers to investigate movement, coordination, and motor control
without the need of a specialist qualification or training. However, the review concluded
that a combination of different assessments was needed for a comprehensive
assessment of manual function in children with DCD. These assessments should
consider physical and motor difficulties in relation to how they impact activities of daily
living and participation, including attention to participation in educational settings.
1. The Children's Activity Scale for Parents and Teachers (ChAS-P/T) (Rosenblum,
2006) can also be administered by parents and teachers to identify children at risk
of DCD based on measures of fine motor skills, gross motor coordination,
activities of daily living (ADLs), and organisation in space and time. This test is
suitable for children aged 4-8 years old. Teachers can use the teacher-specific
version to assess motor coordination and organisational skills in their settings.
2. The Movement Assessment Battery for Children - Second Edition Checklist
(MABC-2 Checklist) (Henderson, 2007) is aimed at addressing a broader
population of children with motor difficulties. This assessment can be used for
24
children aged 5 to 12 years. Specifically, this assessment screens for motor
coordination difficulties in self-care, classroom, and physical activities. While,
teachers can complete the checklist based on classroom observations, a specialist
(e.g., OT, physiotherapist) should analyse the results and assist in interpretation if
concerns arise.
3. The Developmental Coordination Disorder Questionnaire 2007 (Wilson et al.,
2009) can be administered by parents or teachers to identify children at risk of
DCD based on observable movement control, fine motor skills, and general
coordination. This test is suitable for children ages 5-15 and can be completed by
teachers based on classroom observations of handwriting, PE performance, and
coordination in daily school activities.
Van der Linde et al (2015) also reviewed instruments for assessment of capacity in
activities of daily living in children with DCD. Seven assessments were considered in this
review: (1) the Bruininks-Oseretsky Test of Motor Performance-2 (BOT-2) (Bruininks,
2005), (2) the Do-Eat (Josman et al., 2010), (3) the Movement Assessment Battery for
Children-2 (MABC-2) (Henderson, 2007), (4) the School-Assessment of Motor and
Process Skills (School AMPS) (Fisher et al., 2002), (5) the Tuffts Assessment of Motor
Performance (TAMP) (Haley et al., 1992), (6) the Test of Gross Motor Development
(TGMD) (Ulrich, 1985), and (7) the Functional Independence Measure for Children
(WeeFIM) (Msall et al., 1994). While most assessment instruments in this review were
standardised clinical or functional tools designed to be administered by trained
professionals, there was one tool that could be administered by educators; the Test of
Gross Motor Development. This test was also reviewed as part of another systematic
review identified in our search (Lee and Zwicker, 2021). However, it is important to note
that this assessment only assesses one domain of activities of daily living (play/leisure).
While it could be used as a screening tool for this domain, the other domains of activities
of daily living (self-care and productivity, and schoolwork) should also be considered for a
more holistic understanding of need.
The Test of Gross Motor Development (TGMD) is sometimes used in physical education
or educational settings and assesses gross motor development. This test involves
activities such as running, jumping, catching, or throwing and is suitable for children aged
3-10 and may be administered by teachers with guidance or after some basic training.
This test consists of two subtests with a total of 12 items: Locomotor (6) and Object
Control (6).
25
Teacher-friendly tools to identify DCD and motor difficulties summary
The Developmental Coordination Disorder Questionnaire 2007
The Children's Activity Scale for Parents and Teachers (ChAS-P/T)
The Movement Assessment Battery for Children - Second Edition Checklist
The Test of Gross Motor Development (TGMD)
Literacy assessment
Children with sensory and/or physical difficulties may also experience challenges with
literacy development, which can impact their ability to read, write, and engage with
learning materials effectively. Vision impairments, even relatively common issues such as
near-sightedness or far-sightedness, can have a significant impact on reading ability. For
instance, children may struggle to see text clearly on the board or on a page in front of
them, which can affect their engagement and comprehension. Similarly, children with
hearing impairments may experience delays in oral language development, which in turn
can hinder the acquisition of reading skills. In both cases, what may initially appear to be
reading difficulties could in fact stem from underlying sensory difficulties. Some children
with multisensory impairment may experience delayed oral language development and
literacy skills development.
Regular physical, vision, and hearing checks are considered good practice and can help
identify or even correct certain difficulties early on. However, these routine screenings
may not capture the full range of challenges faced by children and young people with
sensory and/or physical needs. Some associated difficulties may go undetected, or the
results may not fully explain the underlying issues affecting a child's learning or
participation. However, assessing cognitive functions and literacy may be difficult for
some children and young people with sensory and/or physical needs as many formal and
informal measures use visual stimuli or are administered orally.
In the Cross-Cutting Themes Report of our collection of reviews we report several
different ways of assessing reading and writing that could apply to children and young
people with physical, motor, or sensory difficulties. However, one study in our review
addressed the identification of reading difficulties specifically for readers with hearing
impairments (Lam et al., 2020).
The identification of reading difficulties in children with hearing impairments and who use
sign language may be different compared to children without hearing difficulties.
Curriculum-based measurements designed to assess reading skills in children without
26
hearing impairments may not be appropriate at measuring reading skills in children and
young people who use sign language as their first language given that sign language
does not have a written form. Lam and colleagues (Lam et al., 2020) examined the use of
curriculum-based reading measures² in benchmarking literacy skills and informing
interventions for children with hearing impairments. Types of reading measures included
signed and silent reading fluency, cloze assessments, and maze assessments. In a cloze
assessment, children are asked to read passages where some words are removed or left
blank. Children are asked to fill in the blanks with appropriate words based on context.
This task typically measures reading comprehension, vocabulary, and language
prediction skills. Maze assessments have the same structure, but here children are
provided with multiple choice options to fill in the blanks.
Lam et al.'s (2020) findings demonstrated that research on reading fluency assessments
for students with hearing impairments highlights significant variability in reliability, validity,
and scoring approaches across different measures. Studies examining signed reading
fluency (where participants read the presented passage to the examiner using sign
language) found that student responses varied depending on expressive sign language
skills, task difficulty, and scoring methods, making it unclear whether the same construct
was being measured across studies. These findings suggest challenges in assessing
reading fluency through sign language due to inconsistencies in administration and
interpretation. Thus, performance on signed fluency cannot be interpreted the same way
as performance via oral fluency.
Similarly, the studies on silent reading fluency (Lam et al., 2020; Rose et al., 2008)
revealed inconsistent findings, likely due to differences in methodology, with Rose
reporting stronger reliability and validity than Lam. The cloze assessments showed
moderate to strong reliability in two studies, though the validity evidence varied
depending on how it was assessed. Maze assessments demonstrated strong reliability
across four studies, particularly for younger students (primary and early secondary) when
short task durations and clear scoring methods were used. Overall, while maze tasks
appear promising, all three tools should be used with caution and alongside other
methods to provide a well-rounded evaluation of reading proficiency in children and
young people with hearing impairments.
Identification and assessment summary
Our review identified few systematic reviews dedicated to the identification tools and
methods that mainstream teachers can use to identify physical, motor, or sensory
difficulties. This may reflect the relatively medicalised pathway to diagnosis and support
2 Curriculum-based assessment are informal, teacher-led assessments that measure a student's progress
aligned with the setting's curriculum.
27
for children and young people with these types of needs, which suggests that sensory
and/or physical needs are usually perceived within the context of medical or clinical
research and in the periphery of teaching and learning (Miller & Hodges, 2025;
Kamenopoulou, 2022). For example, our REA found no studies evaluating tools available
to mainstream educators in identifying educational needs associated with vision
impairments. Although it is possible that there may be tools available that were not
identified by our REA search, the lack of findings in this strand may highlight a gap in the
research. There is a pressing need for tools that are specifically designed and validated
for use by mainstream educators to identify difficulties related to sensory and/or physical
needs, assess their severity, and understand their impact on educational access and
participation. This may be important particularly given that access to medical
professionals and specialist support may be limited or delayed.
In summary, a multidisciplinary approach between families, education professionals and
healthcare professionals is needed to identify key strengths and challenges and to
coordinate tailored support. Practitioners should recognise the interaction between a
child's health condition, functional abilities, environmental factors, and individual
characteristics in the identification and support process. Assessment strategies should
align with the ICF by taking a holistic, multidimensional approach to identification of need.
While the role of identification falls predominately on the multidisciplinary team, there
were a few observations, checklists, and screening tools that mainstream teachers, and
non-clinicians could administer to identify and flag concerns. However, these tools often
should involve some training, and interpretation should be aided by a healthcare
professional.
28
Support and intervention
The aim of this section is to review the studies from our search that focused on support
and intervention strategies suitable for use by mainstream education professionals. We
focus specifically on approaches that are effective in supporting educational outcomes
including literacy, writing, maths, science, and general attainment. Our search identified 6
studies on vision impairment, 7 on hearing impairment, and 5 on physical and motor
difficulties (including DCD) (see Table 5). No studies were found for multisensory
impairment.
Due to the overlapping nature of approaches to support children and young people with
different types of sensory and/or physical needs, this section is structured by approaches
rather than by need.
Table 5. Number of studies addressing support and intervention
Area of need
Number of studies
Vision impairment
6
Hearing impairment
7
Physical and Motor Difficulties (including DCD)
5
Multisensory impairment
0
When reporting on intervention and support strategies in this REA, we sometimes refer to
effect sizes that were reported in the studies reviewed. Effect sizes range from 0 to 1 and
refer to how much of a difference an approach or intervention makes, beyond just
whether it works. A small effect (around 0.2) means a modest improvement, a medium
effect (around 0.5) suggests moderate improvement or progress, and a large effect (0.8
or more) indicates a strong impact on learning. Additionally, evidence can come from
various study designs, each differing in the strength and type of reliability they offer.
Single-case designs provide strong evidence for the consistency of effects within
individuals, making them valuable for understanding how interventions work in specific
cases. However, their findings may not be widely generalisable (i.e., applicable to other
individuals and/or settings). In contrast, group-design studies such as randomised
controlled trials offer more generalisable results across larger populations but may
overlook important individual differences in how students respond to interventions.
Ideally, a strong body of evidence should be based off multiple types of study designs.
29
High quality teaching and universal support
The SEND Code of Practice (DfE, 2015) asserts that high-quality teaching that is
differentiated and personalised will meet the individual needs of the majority of children
and young people. Inclusive practice and accessibility are essential for children and
young people with sensory and/or physical impairments to meaningfully participate in
education. While these factors are not direct educational outcomes, they contribute to
improved learning and achievement. Adjustments and approaches can be incorporated
at as part of universal design and high-quality teaching. The approaches identified in our
rapid review include adjustments to the physical environment, the use of assistive
technology, and alternative communication techniques. Each of these will be discussed
in turn.
Physical environment
In the Cross-Cutting Themes Report of our collection of reviews, we highlighted several
effective strategies to design inclusive settings which benefit children with different types
of special educational needs. These strategies can also be applicable to children and
young people with sensory and/or physical needs and will not be repeated in the current
review. Here we review more specific adjustments that can be put into place for children
and young people with sensory and/or physical needs.
Physical and social environmental adaptations, specialist equipment, and support from
physiotherapists, occupational therapists, speech and language therapists, teaching
assistants, and early years practitioners can play a key role in promoting access to
learning and helping students with sensory and/or physical needs reach their learning
potential. Early intervention and inclusive practices are particularly important in
supporting positive educational outcomes. However, there is no one-size-fits-all approach
to inclusion and accessibility. Each setting and individual student will vary and thus it is
important to understand the specific barriers and address them (Opie et al., 2017).
There are numerous changes or adaptation that schools can consider to make their
settings more inclusive. Settings can ensure level access to spaces in the school (e.g.,
by installing ramps or lifts, and widening doorways). Similarly, the layout of the physical
environment in a setting can be arranged to allow independent movement with clear
pathways. Small changes (like where a child sits, or how they transition between lessons)
can enhance accessibility and inclusion.
Children with hearing impairment may find it difficult to focus on tasks in a noisy
environment (Greenaway et al., 2022). For example, research into secondary pupils'
impressions of their school's acoustic environment found that noisiest spaces were
sports halls, assembly halls, corridors and dining rooms. Pupils with additional learning
30
needs (e.g., hearing impairment or receiving learning support) reported being significantly
more affected by poor school acoustics, school location and build (Connolly et al., 2013).
Therefore, settings may consider reducing excess noise and sounds. Educators can
minimise background noise with sound-absorbing materials such as carpeting, wallpaper,
curtains, or soft-furnishings. Teachers can also ensure that their faces can be seen when
speaking and giving instructions.
Attending to the 'three Cs' can support environmental access and inclusion of learners
with physical and sensory needs: limiting visual clutter, reducing cacophony, and
prioritising comfort. Minimising visual and auditory stimuli can help to reduce
overstimulation, helping to improve attention and concentration. Prioritising physical
comfort such as ambient lighting, temperature, or seating can also help children and
young people maintain focus and improve physical wellbeing (Barrett et al., 2015; Zihl &
Dutton, 2015).
Targeted support
In this section, we review several findings that address targeted support techniques for
children and young people with sensory and/or physical needs. Although many of these
approaches are targeted to the individual needs of the students, we have specified where
some approaches can also be implemented in universally.
Assistive technology
Assistive technologies are tools or devices that aim to remove barriers to learning for
students with different types of SEND. This synthesis of seven studies identified in our
rapid review highlights key findings on assistive technology (AT) and evidence-based
interventions for students with physical, hearing, and vision impairments. Examples of
assistive technology include screen readers or screen magnifiers, braille displays, braille
notetakers (e.g., BrailleNote Touch), Electronic Magnifiers (i.e., devices for enlarging
printed text), audiobooks, Text-to-Speech (TTS) software, or Speech-to-Text (STT)
software and voice command software. It is important to note here that a common
misconception is that all people with vision impairment/blindness use Braille. Braille is a
tactile phonetic alphabet system that can be useful for some children with vision
impairments however, only a small percentage (around 4% to 7%) of school-aged
children with vision impairments in the UK use Braille (RNIB, 2020). Assistive
technologies such as screen reading software can be helpful in supporting children and
young people with vision impairments and with multisensory impairments.
Computer-assisted instruction is a teaching method using computers and software to
deliver instruction. Examples include: educational software, digital learning modules,
31
online tutorials, and interactive simulations. Findings from two systematic reviews (Tuttle
& Carter, 2022; 2023) focused on computer-assisted instruction (CAI) for students with
vision impairments across different year groups. CAI was found to be effective for
developing vocabulary and maths skills, particularly in learning the Nemeth code for
braille mathematics. However, despite some positive outcomes, the review identified
significant methodological concerns, including inadequate reporting of participant
demographics, minimal educator involvement, and a lack of pre-intervention technology
training. As a result, these reviews concluded that CAI is not yet considered an evidence-
based practice for students with VI.
Hoskin et al. (2024) investigated technology used as a tool for teaching and learning
braille literacy. However, across the studies they reviewed, they found that the quality of
research was low with little evidence to support the use of assistive technology for braille
literacy education. They concluded that clear standards are needed to ensure that the
evaluation of assistive technologies is consistent across researchers and clinicians,
ultimately supporting better outcomes. Technologies designed to support braille literacy
for children and young people should offer real-time auditory and tactile feedback,
promote independent learning and editing, and be user-friendly, motivating, and
engaging to encourage regular use and meaningful learning experiences.
A review (Bell & Foiret, 2020) on assistive technology (AT) for students in secondary
school or university (age not reported) with hearing impairments examined the impact of
AT in educational settings. Findings highlighted the effectiveness of technologies such as
C-Print (real-time transcription) and real-time captioning in mainstream education.
Speech-to-text technologies (e.g., such as C-Print (real-time transcription) and real-time
captioning) that provide live transcription of what is being said in class were effective
tools. As the teacher speaks, a trained captionist or specialised software converts their
spoken words into written text that appears on a screen (e.g., a laptop or tablet in front of
the student). This helps students with hearing impairment follow the lesson more easily.
A second scoping review (Guiberson & Crowe, 2018) on multilingual children with
hearing loss explored evidence-based interventions in areas such as audition, speech,
language, and literacy. Promising interventions included auditory verbal therapy, phonics
with vision support, story grammar techniques, and explicit vocabulary instruction. While
this review identified 35 effective interventions it also stressed the importance of
individualised intervention planning. However, research on the academic impact of AT for
children and young people with hearing impairment remains limited, with a strong need
for rigorous and replicable intervention studies.
One major limitation across these studies on AT in our REA was the lack of technology
training for students, and general usability for educators which is concerning given that
limited technology proficiency contributes to AT abandonment. Moreover, the
32
involvement of specialists in implementing AT was limited, with less than one-third of
studies involving Qualified Teachers of Visually Impaired Children and Young People
(QTVIs) AT specialists, or special educators. Findings from Hoskin et al. (2024) suggest
that teacher competence and reflective practice are important for improving outcomes in
students with VI. Many studies also failed to specify educators' roles in troubleshooting
devices, navigating applications, or providing instructional support.
The use of robotic-assisted interventions for rehabilitation, education, play, and social
interaction (e.g., NAOᵀ, LegoᵀM, IROMEC, etc.) were explored in one systematic review
(Cruz et al., 2017). Robots were used for students with Cerebral Palsy and autism in a
variety of settings for an average of 9.76 sessions across eight and a half weeks across
these studies. The most commonly used robot was the NAOᵀ with autistic children and
the Lego TM in children with CP. The most versatile robot was the IROMEC, which was
used with both autistic and CP participants. However, the findings on the use of this
technology use were mixed with some studies reporting a positive effect and others
reporting no significant improvement in engagement, playfulness, cognitive and social
skills, and motor control. There were also difficulties with the usability of this technology.
Parents, caregivers, and teachers were not always able to readily implement these
devices and needed specialised support for technical adaptations and programming. In
addition, the quality and validity of this evidence is low as the majority of these findings
were from case studies rather than more robust methodologies such as randomised
controlled trials. Although these outcomes may show potential; more evidence is needed
to establish reliability of this technology.
Finally, it is important to recognise that not all children and young people will find it easy
to use different types of technology. While some tools may be intuitive and quickly
adopted, others may present challenges depending on a student's individual needs and
preferences. When trialling assistive technologies, it is essential to consider the child's
comfort, confidence, and sense of independence. Their views should play a central role
in selecting tools that genuinely support their learning. Educators should approach this
process with patience and flexibility, offering encouragement and support as students
explore what works best for them. Research on the academic impact of AT for children
and young people with hearing impairment remains limited, with a strong need for
rigorous and replicable intervention studies.
Effective assistive technology support approaches summary
Computer-assisted instruction for children and young people with vision
impairments
Importance of user training, IT support and educator confidence in using assistive
technology
33
Augmentative and Alternative Communication
Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) systems refer to a range of tools or
strategies to aid in communication for children and young people who may have
difficulties with language production or comprehension. Types of AAC include gestures
and facial expressions, writing, or signing systems such as Makaton, spelling words by
pointing to letters, the use of apps, and using a computer with a "voice", sometimes
called a speech-generating device.
One review (Prinsloo et al., 2024) investigated elements of participation outcomes of
AAC interventions with children with complex communication needs in early years and
primary school settings. Findings demonstrated that different metrics of participation were
reported across studies including attendance, involvement, activity competence,
preference, as well as personal-related outcomes, such as symbol use, rather than
subjective participation experiences. Access to AAC systems was linked to engagement
levels comparable to those of typically developing peers across various activities, while
also enhancing the duration of play and improving communication, including participation
in group work and peer interactions. Another review identified in our search (Bunning et
al., 2014) also reported greater social inclusion and positive parent perceptions regarding
their children's communication following highly tailored approaches to AAC.
This increase in participation may allow children and young people to experience a larger
range of activities and cultivate different preferences which may in turn boost their
internal motivation resulting in engaging in meaningful activities, enjoyment, and success.
A child's perception of competence and activity preference can shape their sense of self
(Imms et al., 2017).
STEM (science, technology, engineering, and maths) interventions
Three systematic reviews identified in our search investigated STEM interventions for
children and young people with sensory and physical impairments. Of these, two reviews
investigated programmes and technologies to support STEM in children with sensory and
physical impairments.
Ahmed and Chao (2018) reviewed 14 studies that investigated assistive learning
technologies to support maths learning for students with vision impairments in upper
primary to secondary school students, roughly aged 11 to 18 years. They investigated
techniques that used the 'SAMR' model of learning technology integration. The SAMR
model is a framework designed to help educators reflect on and improve the way
technology is integrated into teaching and learning. It outlines four levels of technology
use: Substitution, Augmentation, Modification, and Redefinition, which move from simple
enhancement to transformational change.
34
Substitution refers to when technology is used as a direct replacement for traditional
tools, without altering the task itself. For example, a student might type an essay on a
word processor instead of writing it by hand. While this can make the task more efficient,
it doesn't add new functionality or deepen the learning experience. The authors
categorised three approaches under the 'Substitution' level. Students with vision
impairments demonstrated better maths outcomes when using these approaches.
1. AnimalWatch curriculum (Beal and Rosenblum, 2015, Beal et al., 2011), which
replaces visual text with audio feedback to make the curriculum accessible for
students with VI in learning to solve mathematics problems.
2. The i-Math project involves the development of an audio reader designed to read
mathematics documents and text. i-Math can read equations, mathematical
descriptions, and other notation in LaTeX format and other common mathematics
markup languages (Wongkia et al., 2012)
3. Finally, Van Scoy, McLaughlin, and Fulmers (2005) developed a graphic tool that
combined auditory output and tactile graphs for maths teaching. Here it was found
that using a combination of auditory and tactile feedback resulted in better
outcomes then using only one of these strategies.
The second level, Augmentation, still involves substitution, but with added functional
improvements. Using features such as spellcheck, formatting tools, or voice typing
introduces efficiency and accessibility that were not possible with traditional tools.
Although the task remains largely the same, the technology enhances how it is
performed. The authors categorised three approaches that were categorised under the
'Augmentation' level. However, the authors of the review did not note whether these tools
resulted in better outcomes compared to typical maths delivery.
1. The Graph and Number Line Input and Exploration (GNIE) project is an innovative
approach that helps students, particularly those with vision impairments, to access
and understand graphs and numerical data through sound. Instead of relying
solely on visual representations, GNIE uses multimodal input, combining auditory
cues with minimal visuals, to represent features like points on a number line or
data trends in a graph. For example, different pitches or tones might correspond to
different values, allowing students to "hear" the shape or direction of data. This
method provides an alternative way for students to engage with mathematical
concepts that are often inaccessible through traditional visual formats. While still
under development, GNIE highlights how assistive technology can expand access
to core curriculum content in more inclusive and creative ways.
35
2. High-resolution refreshable tactile devices, such as Tesla Touch, are emerging
technologies designed to provide real-time tactile feedback, similar to how a
screen display changes visual information. These devices can present both textual
and non-textual digital content through touch, making them particularly promising
for students with vision impairments. Rather than relying on static braille or simple
vibrations, these tools create detailed, changing tactile sensations that allow users
to explore information more dynamically, like feeling the shape of a graph or the
layout of a diagram. However, these technologies are not yet widely available in
schools, and early research suggests that they require significant training to use
effectively. Importantly, they are not one-size-fits-all, meaning students may need
personalised support to benefit fully from them.
3. The Tactile Graphics with Voice (TGV) (Baker et al, 2014), is a system designed
to support students with vision impairments, especially those who are not fluent in
Braille. TGV combines raised tactile graphics with embedded audio prompts that
students can access on demand, typically by touching specific areas of the
graphic. This allows learners to explore mathematical content such as charts,
shapes, or graphs, using both touch and sound, creating a multisensory learning
experience. Research showed that for students who were not confident Braille
readers, TGV provided an efficient and accessible way to engage with maths
materials, supporting greater independence and understanding.
With Modification, technology begins to change the nature of the task itself. For instance,
students might use a shared Google Doc to collaborate on writing, provide peer feedback
using comment functions, and revise their work in real time. This level promotes more
interactive and collaborative learning, moving beyond individual engagement. However,
the authors of the review did not note whether these tools resulted in better outcomes
compared to typical maths delivery.
1. The Math in the Dark project, developed by McDermott-Wells (2015), aimed to
improve real-time communication in mathematics learning for students with vision
impairments. It combines two key tools: a Nemeth Braille editor, which supports
the specialised Braille code used for mathematical notation, and a real-time instant
messaging system. By integrating a translator that converted between Nemeth
Braille and MathML (Mathematics Markup Language), this tool enables students to
engage in mathematical conversations with their sighted peers and teachers
through instant messaging.
2. The Talking Tactile Tablet (TTT), described by Landau and colleagues (2003),
offers an innovative way for students with vision impairments to access and
interact with mathematics assessments. The device allows students to place
special raised-line or textured graphic sheets on its touch-sensitive surface. When
36
the student touches specific shapes, icons, or areas on the sheet, the TTT
provides audio feedback, helping them understand and respond to mathematical
content.
Finally, Redefinition refers to technology that allows for the creation of new tasks that
were previously inconceivable. An example would be students producing a multimedia
documentary, conducting interviews via video calls with people from different countries,
and publishing their work online. This kind of learning fosters creativity, authentic
communication, and global collaboration, offering students transformative educational
experiences.
1. The Graph Sketching Tool (GSK), developed by Balik (2013), was designed to
allow both students with vision impairments and sighted peers to work with graphs
using a variety of input methods, such as keyboards, mice, touchscreens, voice
commands, and screen readers. In a study involving ten students with VI, Balik
found that the flexibility of input and output options enabled all students to interact
with each other's graphs, fostering meaningful mathematical discussion and
collaboration. Most notably, the GSK empowered those with vision impairments to
independently construct and interpret graphs, making it a valuable tool for
supporting mathematical ownership, engagement, and accessibility.
A second systematic review reviewed methods by which STEM programs support the
engagement of a range of neurodiverse adolescents (aged 9 to 19) including children
and young people with sensory and physical needs (Jenson & Lee, 2024). This study
investigated a variety of maths programmes included in the review by Ahmed and Chao
(2018) as well as additional programmes including: (a) Inventing, Designing, and
Engineering for All Students (IDEAS) Maker Program, (b) 3D iSTAR Engineering
Summer Program, (c) ADHD Engineering Summer Camp, (d) Virtual Mentoring Program,
(e) Mentor-Matching Program, (f) National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
Neurodiversity Network (N3) Program, (g) For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and
Technology (FIRST) Robotics Club, (h) self-voicing computer programme for pre-algebra
maths. The synthesis of findings from these programs highlights a set of consistently
effective strategies for fostering STEM interest and confidence among neurodiverse
students in upper primary to secondary school. Key elements included the use of hands-
on activities, flexible, student-led learning opportunities, and thoughtful accommodations
tailored to individual needs. Informed by the perspectives of students, parents, and
program leaders, these approaches not only supported meaningful engagement but also
strengthened learners' confidence and enthusiasm for STEM subjects.
A third review by Klingenberg et al. (2019) examined the attitudes and experiences of
pupils and teachers regarding the use of abacuses, tactile graphics, and strategies for
developing mathematical concepts among children and young people with vision
37
impairment. This review suggests that environmental factors significantly influence
performance and emphasised the importance of parental involvement in school life.
Although the low prevalence of vision impairment often means only one child with vision
impairment is in a mainstream class, many of the adaptations made for these students,
such as more descriptive explanations, benefit all learners. However, accurate instruction
and tailored feedback was underscored, with teacher expertise shown to have a direct
impact on VI learner outcomes.
Increased teacher knowledge of vision impairment enhances inclusive participation, and
when teachers are actively involved in creating alternative resources, both they and their
students report positive experiences. For example, learners with VI often use their bodies
as tools for measuring and counting. Teachers play a key role in helping these students
connect their informal, physical experiences with formal mathematical concepts. Well-
informed and teachers who reflect on their practice are linked to better outcomes for VI
learners, unless there are additional cognitive difficulties. The Klingenberg et al. (2019)
review found that with appropriate curriculum materials, 10 out of 12 students with VI
performed as well as their sighted peers. However, this success was closely linked to the
quality of the learning environment and teacher competence. Reflective practice and
teacher attitudes were found to be particularly influential.
Finally, a central concern raised across the body of research in this REA was the
inconsistency in research approaches, with the authors calling for more randomised
controlled trials (RCTs) to strengthen the evidence base.
38
Effective STEM support for children and young people with sensory and/or
physical impairments summary
Assistive technology works: Simple adaptations (like audio feedback or tactile
graphs) can significantly improve maths outcomes for those with VI
Combining touch, sound, and speech helps make abstract STEM content more
accessible for children and young people with VI
Well-informed teachers who adapt materials and offer clear, descriptive
explanations are valued by children and young people with sensory and physical
impairments
Strategies like verbalising visual information and using physical objects to explore
maths support all learners, not just those with VI
Technology (e.g., refreshable tactile devices, captioning, collaborative platforms)
show promise but may require specific training to implement
Positive attitudes, reflective teaching, and parental involvement enhance
engagement and performance
Literacy interventions
Children and young people with sensory and/or physical difficulties may also
demonstrate difficulties with various aspects of literacy such as reading, spelling, or
writing. For example, children and young people with hearing impairments may decode
and process text differently than those without hearing impairments (Marschark, 2006;
Marschark et al., 2011). Children with physical difficulties may have difficulties holding
books and turning pages which could limit their engagement in reading activities (Smith
et al., 2009). Children with hearing loss may have reduced vocabulary outcomes
compared to hearing-age-matched peers (Convertino et al., 2014). Taken together
literacy support is important for children and young people with sensory and/or physical
needs.
A systematic review by Kart (2022) on the use of Visual Phonics³ for children with
hearing impairments examined its impact on developing code-related literacy skills. All 13
studies in their review demonstrated strong evidence of improvement in phonemic
awareness, decoding, and letter-sound correspondence. The effectiveness of Visual
3 Visual Phonics is a system that uses hand cues and written symbols to represent the sounds (phonemes)
of spoken language. It is designed to support children with hearing impairments, as well as others with
speech, language, or reading difficulties.
39
Phonics was consistent across varying degrees of hearing loss, different ages,
communication methods, and the presence of additional disabilities.
A second scoping review (Guiberson & Crowe, 2018) on multilingual children with
hearing loss explored evidence-based interventions in areas such as audition, speech,
language, and literacy. The authors cite that the compelling interventions included
auditory verbal therapy, phonics with vision support, story grammar techniques, and
explicit vocabulary instruction. This meant that these interventions were clearly described
in the research papers, the only variable being tested was the intervention itself (i.e., the
study controlled for other factors that might affect the outcome). The study used a
pretest-post-test design, meaning they measured something before and after the
intervention to see if it made a difference, and the results showed positive effects after
the intervention. While this scoping review identified interventions with evidence of
effectiveness, it also stressed the importance of individualised intervention planning.
Further, this scoping review did not comment on the quality of the evidence base,
therefore further work needs to be done to establish the quality of this evidence base as
well as more implementation studies which consider individualised planning.
Stauter et al. (2017) examined literacy instruction for young children aged 3 to 8 years
with severe speech and physical impairments (SSPI) who used augmentative and
alternative communication (AAC) systems. The review included six studies focused on
developing emergent literacy skills, such as phonological awareness, decoding, and
participation in shared reading activities. Participants typically had complex
communication needs, often associated with diagnoses like cerebral palsy, and required
substantial physical and communicative support to access instruction.
Across the studies, a range of adapted interventions were employed, including modelling
AAC use (e.g., aided language stimulation), providing switch-activated or tactile reading
materials, using motor-based cues for internal speech, and embedding literacy instruction
in meaningful group-based or naturalistic contexts. Despite methodological variation, all
studies reported positive outcomes. These included increased engagement, improved
decoding and word identification, and enhanced use of AAC systems to communicate
during reading tasks. Interventions were most effective when they enabled active
participation, included explicit instruction and scaffolding, and were tailored to the child's
abilities and preferred mode of communication.
1. Modelling AAC use (e.g., aided language stimulation), adults modelled the use of
AAC devices during shared reading by pointing to symbols or words on a
communication board or speech-generating device while reading aloud. This
exposed children with SSPI to language input paired with AAC use, helping them
learn how to use their own AAC systems functionally during literacy tasks.
40
2. Providing switch-activated or tactile reading materials is where adapted books with
tactile symbols and switch-activated page-turning devices are used. These
adaptations allowed children with limited motor control to independently navigate
storybooks and engage with content in ways aligned with their physical abilities.
3. Motor-based cues for internal speech is where motor-based interventions like
prompting children to use consistent motor movements (e.g., pressing a switch or
eye-gaze selection) as a bridge to internal speech strategies are used, helping
children rehearse and retrieve sounds or words during literacy activities even
when they could not speak.
4. Embedding literacy instruction in meaningful group-based or naturalistic contexts
involves integrated phonics instruction into daily routines in classroom settings,
involving both children with and without disabilities. Instruction occurred during
shared group reading, morning meetings, and hands-on play, enabling children to
practice literacy skills in authentic social and learning contexts. This promoted
generalisation and motivation for literacy use.
However, the Stauter et al. (2017) review also identified key limitations. Most studies
involved very small sample sizes and lacked statistical rigour or standardised outcome
measures. Interventions were often delivered by researchers rather than educators,
raising questions about implementation in typical classroom settings. Follow-up data on
long-term outcomes or skill generalisation were rarely reported. Overall, while the
findings demonstrate effective literacy interventions, the authors highlight the need for
more robust, teacher-led studies in mainstream settings that examine sustainable and
scalable approaches to literacy instruction for children with SSPI.
Finally, in a review of systematic reviews, Wang and Williams (2014) examined studies
investigating reading instruction for children and young people (aged 3 to 22) with
hearing impairments. There was some evidence that suggested reading outcomes were
improved through a number of instructional strategies, including explicit instruction, story
grammar instruction, the use of high-interest literature, instruction in the grammatical
principles of American Sign Language (ASL) and how to translate ASL into written
English, reading comprehension strategy instruction, and teaching of morphological
rules, among others. There may also be benefits of repeated reading for fluency
improvement. However, the evidence supporting these strategies is limited. They found
limited evidence on the effectiveness of phonics and phonological awareness instruction
for this group, as well as a lack of research on approaches to teaching reading
comprehension.
However, in terms of sight word recognition, Wang and Williams (2014) report on one
systematic review which indicated that children and young people with hearing
41
impairments can learn to recognise words automatically similar to their hearing peers and
that beginning readers would benefit from matching written words to signs, sign print, or
both. Independent oral reading may be an instructional approach that is successful in
improving reading fluency for children and young people with hearing impairments.
Wang and Williams (2014) found some evidence that vocabulary knowledge for children
and young people with hearing impairment may be improved through a number of
different instructional techniques. These included direct or indirect vocabulary instruction
(e.g., learning new words incidentally, rather than through explicit teaching), through the
use of aural/oral habilitation (i.e., approaches that develop spoken language through
listening and speech, typically used with children with hearing loss) following cochlear
implantation, through the use of sign language (American Sign Language (ASL) in this
instance) and, by using computer software.
Effective literacy support for children and young people with sensory and/or
physical impairments summary
Visual Phonics for children with hearing impairment
Auditory verbal therapy for multilingual children with hearing loss
Phonics with vision support for multilingual children with hearing loss
Story grammar techniques for multilingual children with hearing loss
Explicit vocabulary instruction for multilingual children with hearing loss
Modelling AAC use (e.g., aided language stimulation) for children with severe
speech and physical impairments
Providing switch-activated or tactile reading materials for children with severe
speech and physical impairments
Using motor-based cues for internal speech for children with severe speech and
physical impairments
Embedding literacy instruction in meaningful group-based or naturalistic contexts
for children with severe speech and physical impairments
Direct instruction for children with severe speech and physical impairments
Scaffolding for children with severe speech and physical impairments
42
Support and intervention summary
Our review identified a total of 18 systematic reviews dedicated to the support and
intervention strategies that mainstream teachers can use to support sensory and/or
physical needs.
While there are some evidence-based strategies to support children and young people
with sensory and/or physical needs, the current evidence base remains limited. There is
a clear need for larger-scale studies using randomised controlled trials to strengthen our
understanding of what works. Nevertheless, this review identified several promising
techniques.
Environmental adaptations such as level access, reduced noise, and minimised visual
clutter support engagement and comfort for learners with sensory and/or physical needs.
The importance of early intervention, setting-specific adjustments, and collaboration with
therapists and specialists was underscored. Teachers can play a key role in reducing
visual or auditory overstimulation and managing transitions through simple, low-cost
adaptations that prioritise comfort and clarity in the learning environment.
Assistive technology was shown to offer promise, particularly for students with vision
impairments, but the quality of evidence was mixed. While some studies showed benefits
from screen readers, braille notetakers, and computer-assisted instruction, most lacked
robust methodology and educator involvement. Training and usability challenges, as well
as low implementation by qualified staff, limited the practical impact of these tools.
Similarly, robotic-assisted technologies for children with physical disabilities or autism
showed some benefits, but current evidence remains too limited and inconsistent for firm
conclusions.
Positive outcomes were observed in areas such as mathematics, reading, phonological
awareness, and the use of assistive technology for students with communication needs
and sensory or physical impairments. However, implementing tools such as assistive
technology, computer-assisted instruction, and advanced AAC devices, including
specialised software, hardware, apps, and robotics, often require input from technology
specialists and IT staff for setup, programming, and ongoing support.
Multisensory teaching strategies may enhance accessibility and support memory and
information retention for learners with sensory needs. In STEM subjects, various
approaches, such as substitution, modification, augmentation, or redefinition, can also
make content more accessible. However, it is essential that these adaptations are
meaningfully aligned with the learning task. To ensure effective and individualised
support, educators should collaborate closely with specialists and healthcare
professionals to assess each student's needs and develop tailored interventions.
43
In literacy, strong evidence supports the use of Visual Phonics for children with hearing
impairments and AAC-supported literacy instruction for children with severe speech and
physical impairments. Key features of effective interventions included explicit instruction,
the use of motor-based cues, tactile books, and embedding instruction in real-life
routines. However, most studies were small-scale, researcher-led, and lacked long-term
outcome data, highlighting the need for more robust, teacher-led research in mainstream
contexts.
Finally, a recurring theme across the review was the inconsistency in research design,
limited educator involvement, and lack of standardised outcomes. While some promising
practices are emerging, there is a clear need for larger-scale, high-quality studies that
evaluate practical, scalable strategies for use by teachers, especially in settings with
limited access to specialist support. Engaging learners in choosing tools and adaptations
that work for them should also be a key consideration moving forward.
44
Conclusions
This review aimed to identify effective methods for the identification and support of
children and young people with sensory and/or physical needs in mainstream education
while highlighting where collaborative practice is essential. These needs included vision
impairment, hearing impairment, multi-sensory impairment (MSI), and physical disabilities
affecting fine or gross motor skills. While such needs are well recognised in the SEND
Code of Practice, our review found that the research on identification and support are still
predominantly grounded in medical and clinical models. Children and young people with
these needs often rely on specialist assessments and equipment to access the school
environment, and teachers may lack the tools or training to identify difficulties early or
assess how they affect learning and participation.
Critically, we found a notable gap in research on identification tools suitable for use by
mainstream educators. Most assessments are specialist-administered or require
interpretation by specialists, and few tools have been adapted or validated for classroom
or early years contexts. This is particularly concerning given limited access to medical
and specialist services in some schools or regions. There is a pressing need for more
research into practical, evidence-based tools that teachers can use to identify and
respond to sensory and physical difficulties, particularly those that align with educational
goals rather than solely clinical criteria.
Although a small number of systematic reviews demonstrated the potential of certain
teaching adaptations, such as multisensory approaches, assistive technology, and
adapted STEM resources, there is a lack of large-scale, high-quality evidence (e.g.,
randomised controlled trials) evaluating their long-term impact. Promising findings were
reported in areas such as phonological awareness, reading, and maths, particularly when
interventions were well structured and personalised. However, many of these strategies
require input from IT specialists, therapists, or other professionals for implementation.
The findings underscore the importance of collaborative planning between teachers and
specialists, as well as the need for high-quality, accessible professional development in
this area. Teachers must be supported to understand the diverse needs of students with
sensory and/or physical difficulties and to confidently make necessary adaptations.
Importantly, learners themselves should be engaged in shaping their support plans,
ensuring strategies are both relevant and timely.
Inconsistencies in outcome reporting and intervention design across studies limit the
generalisability of some findings. Furthermore, due to the rapid nature of this review and
our focus on systematic reviews and meta-analyses, it is possible that some tools or
interventions currently in use, particularly newer, unpublished, or practitioner-led
approaches, may not have been captured. These omissions reflect the current state of
45
the evidence base, not necessarily the effectiveness of those approaches. Future
research should prioritise robust study designs, focus on outcomes linked to educational
access and attainment, and include mainstream educator perspectives.
In summary, while there are clear examples of effective practice, evidence gaps remain
in the areas of teacher-led identification, inclusive classroom strategies, and collaborative
models of provision, highlighting the urgent need to develop, test, and scale approaches
that are feasible within everyday school settings.
46
Appendices
Appendix A: Search terms (PICOS criteria)
We conducted 15 separate searches across five rapid review categories, each focused
on a distinct population: SEMH, SLCN, autism, sensory and/or physical needs, and
cognition and learning. For each population, three searches were performed, focusing
on: identification terms, support terms, and working with others. The intervention,
comparison, and study type remained consistent across all searches, while the
population and outcome terms varied to capture the unique characteristics of each group.
This approach ensured a comprehensive examination of the research literature across
the different populations. PICOS stands for: (1) Population; (2) Intervention; (3)
Comparison; (4) Outcomes; and (5) Study type.
Population:
Population terms: "adolescent" OR child* OR "children and young people" OR kid*
OR "post 16" OR pupil* OR "school aged" OR student* OR teen* OR "young
learner*" OR "young people" OR "young person" OR youth
Educational setting terms: "alternat* educat*" OR class* OR "class* setting" OR
"comprehensive school*" OR "early year*" OR educat* OR elementary OR
"elementary school*" OR "extra-curricular setting*" OR "further educat*" OR
"further educat* setting*" OR "grammar school*" OR "high school" OR "higher
educat*" OR inclus* OR kindergarten OR "learning environment*" OR mainstream*
OR "middle school*" OR nursery OR preschool OR "primary educat*" OR "primary
school*" OR reception OR "remedi* class*" OR "school setting" OR school* OR
"secondary education*" OR "secondary school*" OR "special educat*" OR
"university" OR "whole school" OR "independent school"
General SEND terms: SEND OR SEN OR "special educat* need*" OR "special
need*" OR "learning difficult*" OR "learning disab*" OR "learning difference" OR
"additional need*" OR impair* OR disorder* OR neurodivergent OR "additional
learning need"
Sensory and/or physical needs terms: CVI OR MDVI OR MSI OR PCHL OR
PMLD OR SLD OR "sensory impair*" OR "vis* impair*" OR blind* OR "cerebral
vision impair*" OR "cochlear implant*" OR "cortical vision impair*" OR deaf OR
deafblindness OR "dual sensory impair*" OR "hard of hearing" OR "hearing
impair*" OR "hearing loss" OR "low vision" OR "multi* need*" OR "multi* sensory
impair*" OR "multiple disabil*" OR "multiple impair*" OR "permanent childhood
hearing loss" OR "profound deaf*" OR "residual vision" OR "sensory deprivation"
OR "severe deaf*" OR "severe sight impair*" OR "sight impair*" OR "vision loss"
OR "visual disab*"
47
Intervention:
Identification terms: assess* OR "assessment app*" OR "assessment tools" OR
"behavio* checklist*" OR checklist OR "class* assess*" OR "classroom
observation" OR "cognitive assess*" OR "computer* app" OR "curriculum-based
measure" OR diagnos* OR "dynamic assessment" OR "early screening tools" OR
"educational assessment tool*" OR evaluate OR "formal assess*" OR "formative
assess*" OR "graduated approach" OR identif* OR "informal assess*" OR
measure OR "multi-disciplinary assessment" OR MTSS OR "multi-tiered system of
supports" OR "neuro* assess*" OR observ* OR "parent* report" OR "pupil
observation" OR "response to intervention" OR RTI OR screen* OR "self-
assessment" OR "self-report" OR "smartphone app*" OR "standard* test*" OR
"student observation" OR "tablet app*" OR "teacher judgment*" OR "teacher
observation" OR tool* OR "performance-based"
Support terms: "classroom environment" OR "SEN support" OR "SEND support"
OR SWPBS OR accommodat* OR adaptat* OR approach OR "assistive tech*" OR
"classroom interve*" OR "collaborative teach*" OR curriculum OR "curriculum
adapt*" OR "differentiat* instruction" OR "digital learning" OR "early interven*" OR
"education* program*" OR "education* support" OR "evidence-based interven*"
OR "evidence-informed interven*" OR "exam access arrangement*" OR "exam
accommodat*" OR "graduated approach" OR "group intervention" OR "high-quality
instruct*" OR "high-quality teach*" OR inclus* OR "inclusive education" OR
"inclusive practice" OR "individual support" OR "individual* education plan*" OR
"instruct*" OR interven* OR integrat* OR "mainstream class* support" OR
"mainstream education" OR "mainstream environment" OR "multimedia learning
environment" OR "multi-tiered system* of support" OR "one-to-one" OR "parental
support" OR pedagog* OR "peer support" OR personali*ed OR provision OR
remediat OR "school support service*" OR "school-based" OR "special* interven*"
OR "special* support" OR "specialist teach* support" OR support* OR strateg* OR
"targeted interven*" OR "target* teach* strateg*" OR targeted OR "targeted
support" OR teach* OR "teach* adaptation*" OR "teach* principle*" OR "teach*
strateg*" OR "teach* approach" OR therapy OR "tier 1 interven*" OR "tier 1
support" OR "tier 2 interve*" OR "tier 2 support" OR "tier 3 interven*" OR "tier 3
support" OR treat* OR "universal design" OR "universal interven*" OR "universal
provision" OR "universal support" OR "whole-class support" OR "whole-class
teaching"
Working with others terms: collabor* OR parent* OR carer OR caregiver OR famil*
OR specialist* OR "specialist teacher" OR teacher OR educator OR TA OR
"teaching assistant*" OR "support staff" OR "educational psychologist*" OR EP OR
SLT or SLP or "speech and language therapist*" OR "speech and language
pathologist*" OR "speech therapist" OR "speech pathologist" OR "health visitor"
48
OR HV* OR "Ed Psych" OR counsel* OR "mental health support workers" OR
"child and adolescent mental health service" OR CAHMS OR psychologist* or
therapist* OR "learning support assistant" OR LSA OR "communication support
worker" OR QTOD OR QTMSI OR QTVI OR "co-production" OR "joint working"
OR "healthcare professional" OR "personal carer" OR "occupational therapist"
"Inter-professional collaboration" OR IPC OR expert OR clinician OR nurse
Comparison:
Left blank to include studies without comparison groups
Outcome:
Identification terms: N/A - Not needed for identification terms as there is not
always a specific outcome
Behavioural, Inclusion, Motivation, and Engagement terms: attendance OR
"behavio* outcomes" OR "behavio* regulation" OR "behavio* improvement" OR
"cognitive development" OR "communication skills" OR criminal OR economic OR
employment OR engage* OR financial OR "functional independence" OR
"functional skills development" OR "access to learning" OR "improvement in
learning" OR "inclusive classroom" OR "increase* inclusion" OR "independent
living" OR independent* OR "mental health outcomes" OR motivate* OR offend
OR "prosocial behavio* " OR "reduce* learning barriers" OR "reduce* symptom*"
OR "self-regulat*" OR "school performance" OR "school retention" OR "social
inclusion" OR "social-emotional development" OR "teacher perceptions of student
progress" OR "well-being" OR workplace
Educational outcomes (General): "academic achievement" OR "academic
progress*" OR "academic attainment" OR "academic measure" OR "academic
performance" OR "additional learning support*" OR "educat* achievement" OR
"educat* assess*" OR "educat* attainment" OR "educat* measure" OR "educat*
outcome*" OR "educat* performance" OR "educat* progress" "executive function*"
OR "functional skill* develop*" OR "improve* learning" OR learn* OR "learning
progress" OR "problem solving" OR "reduced learning barriers" OR "school
outcome*" OR "school performance" OR "school retention"
Literacy outcomes: read* OR literacy OR "letter recognition" OR "letter-sound
knowledge" OR "word reading" OR phonic* OR phonolog* OR "reading
comprehension" OR "reading accuracy" OR "reading fluency" OR "reading delay*"
OR "print knowledge" OR decod* OR "alphabet knowledge" OR "listening
comprehension" OR "word recognition" OR "sentence completion"
Writing outcomes: writ* OR literacy OR punctuation OR spelling OR "sentence
writing" OR "free writing" OR "early writing" OR "emergent writing" OR "guided
49
writing" OR "writing fluency" OR handwriting OR "interactive writing" OR "letter
typing" OR "sentence completion"
Mathematics outcomes: math* OR numer* OR numb* "number sense" OR
arithmetic* OR geomet* OR shape OR calcul* OR algebra OR counting OR
addition OR subtraction OR multiplication OR division OR fractions OR statistics*
OR "place value" OR "math* competenc*" OR "math* concept*" OR "math*
knowledge"
Working with others terms: collaboration* or partnership* or co-practice* or
multidisciplinary* or transdisciplinary or interdisciplinary
Study type:
Review type: review OR "systematic review" OR "meta-analysis" OR "narrative
review"
50
References
*Indicates references identified in REA
*AHMED, I. & CHAO, T. 2018. Assistive learning technologies for students with visual
impairments: A critical rehumanizing review. Investigations in Mathematics
Learning, 10, 173-185.
ALLEN, C., NIKOLOPOULOS, T. P., DYAR, D. & O'DONOGHUE, G. M. 2001. Reliability
of a rating scale for measuring speech intelligibility after pediatric cochlear
implantation. Otology & Neurotology, 22, 631-3.
ALLINDER, R. M. & ECCARIUS, M. A. 1999. Exploring the Technical Adequacy of
Curriculum-Based Measurement in Reading for Children Who Use Manually
Coded English. Exceptional Children, 65, 271-283.
APPELMAN, K. I., CALLAHAN, J. O., MAYER, M. H., LUETKE, B. S., & STRYKER, D. S.
2012. Education, employment, and independent living of young adults who are
deaf and hard of hearing. American Annals of the Deaf, 157, 264-275.
AUTISM SPEAKS. 2024. Sensory Issues [Online]. Available:
https://www.autismspeaks.org/sensory-issues. [Accessed 23.04.25].
BALIK, S. P., MEALIN, S. P., STALLMANN, M. F. & RODMAN, R. D. 2013. GSK:
Universally Accessible Graph Sketching. Proceeding of the 44th ACM technical
symposium on Computer science education. Denver, Colorado, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery.
BEAL, C. R. & ROSENBLUM, L.P. 2015. Use of an Accessible iPad App and
Supplemental Graphics to Build Mathematics Skills: Feasibility Study Results.
Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 109, 383-394.
BEAL, C. R., ROSENBLUM, L.P. & SMITH, D. W. 2011. A pilot study of a self-voicing
computer program for prealgebra math problems. Journal of Visual Impairment &
Blindness, 105, 157-169.
*BELL, D. & FOIRET, J. 2020. A rapid review of the effect of assistive technology on the
educational performance of students with impaired hearing. Disability and
Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, 15, 838-843.
*BIEBER, E., SMITS-ENGELSMAN, B. C., SGANDURRA, G., CIONI, G., FEYS, H.,
GUZZETTA, A. & KLINGELS, K. 2016. Manual function outcome measures in
51
children with developmental coordination disorder (DCD): Systematic review.
Research in Developmental Disabilities, 55, 114-31.
BLANK, R., BARNETT, A. L., CAIRNEY, J., GREEN, D., KIRBY, A., POLATAJKO, H.,
ROSENBLUM, S., SMITS-ENGELSMAN, B., SUGDEN, D., WILSON, P. &
VINçON, S. 2019. International clinical practice recommendations on the
definition, diagnosis, assessment, intervention, and psychosocial aspects of
developmental coordination disorder. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology,
61, 242-285.
BLANK, R., SMITS-ENGELSMAN, B., POLATAJKO, H. & WILSON, P. 2012. European
Academy for Childhood Disability (EACD): recommendations on the definition,
diagnosis and intervention of developmental coordination disorder (long version).
Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology., 54, 54-93.
BRUININKS, R. H., BRUININKS, B. D. 2005. Bruininks-Oseretsky Test of Motor
Proficiency, Minneapolis, MN, USA, Pearson Assessment.
BUNNING, K., GONA, J. K., NEWTON, C. R. & HARTLEY, S. 2014. Caregiver
perceptions of children who have complex communication needs following a
home-based intervention using augmentative and alternative communication in
rural Kenya: an intervention note. Augmentative and Alternative Communication,
30, 344-56.
CONNOLLY, D.M., DOCKRELL, J.E., SHIELD, B.M., CONETTA, R. AND COX, T.J.,
2013. Adolescents' perceptions of their school's acoustic environment: The
development of an evidence based questionnaire. Noise and Health, 15(65),
pp.269-280.
CONVERTINO, C., BORGNA, G., MARSCHARK, M. & DURKIN, A. 2014. Word and
world knowledge among deaf learners with and without cochlear implants. The
Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 19, 471-83.
*CRUZ, A. M., RíOS RINCóN, A. M., RODRÍGUEZ DUEñAS, W.R., QUIROGA
TORRES, D. A. & BOH6RQUEZ-HEREDIA, A. F. 2017. What does the literature
say about using robots on children with disabilities? Disability and Rehabilitation:
Assistive Technology, 12, 429-440.
DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION 2024. Special educational needs in England: 2023-
24. UK Government.
52
DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION & DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
2015. Special educational needs and disability code of practice: 0 to 25 years
(Updated 2024). UK Government.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 1995. Think Dual Sensory.
EASTERBROOKS, S. R. & HUSTON, S. G. 2008. The signed reading fluency of
students who are deaf/hard of hearing. The Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf
Education, 13, 37-54.
FARRELL, M. (2006). The effective teacher's guide to sensory impairment and physical
disability: Practical strategies. Taylor & Francis.
FISHER, A. G., BRYZE, K. & HUME, V. 2002. SchoolAMPS: School Version of the
Assessment of Motor and Process Skills., Ft Collins, CO, USA., Three Star Press.
GARRITTY, C., HAMEL, C., TRIVELLA, M., GARTLEHNER, G., NUSSBAUMER-
STREIT, B., DEVANE, D., KAMEL, C., GRIEBLER, U. & KING, V. 2024. Updated
recommendations for the Cochrane rapid review methods guidance for rapid
reviews of effectiveness. British Medical Journal, 384, e076335.
*GONZáLEZ LóPEZ, A., CRESPO MADRID, V., HIDALGO-ROBLES, Á. & GUTIéRREZ-
ORTEGA, M. 2023. Early signs of functioning and contextual factors in children 0
to 6 years of age at high risk of or with developmental coordination disorder: A
scoping review. Child: Care, Health and Development, 49, 230-239.
GREENAWAY, R., DALE, N., SALT, A. & SARGENT, J. (eds.) 2022. Children with vision
impairment: assessment, development and management, London: Mac Keith
Press.
*GUIBERSON, M. & CROWE, K. 2018. Interventions for Multilingual Children With
Hearing Loss: A Scoping Review. Topics in Language Disorders, 38, 225-241.
HALEY, S. M., COSTER, W. J., LUDLOW, L. H., HALTIWANGER, J. T. & ANDRELLOS,
P.A. 1992. Pediatric Evaluation of Disability Inventory: Development,
Standardization and Administration Manual., Boston, MA, USA, Trustees of
Boston University.
HENDERSON, S. E., SUGDEN, D., BARNETT, A. L. 2007. Movement Assessment
Battery for Children-2, Examiner's Manual, London, Pearson Assessment.
*HOSKIN, E. R., COYNE, M. K., WHITE, M. J., DOBRI, S. C. D., DAVIES, T. C. &
PINDER, S. D. 2024. Effectiveness of technology for braille literacy education for
53
children: a systematic review. Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology,
19, 120-130.
IMMS, C., GRANLUND, M., WILSON, P. H., STEENBERGEN, B., ROSENBAUM, P. L. &
GORDON, A. M. 2017. Participation, both a means and an end: a conceptual
analysis of processes and outcomes in childhood disability. Developmental
Medicine & Child Neurology, 59, 16-25.
*JENSON, R. J. & LEE, M. S. 2024. Engaging Neurodiverse Youth in Informal STEM
Learning: Strategies and Recommendations. Connected Science Learning, 6,
126-132.
JOSMAN, N., GOFFER, A. & ROSENBLUM, S. 2010. Development and standardization
of a "do-eat" activity of daily living performance test for children. American Journal
of Occupational Therapy., 64, 47-58.
KAMENOPOULOU, L. 2012. A study on the inclusion of deafblind young people in
mainstream schools: key findings and implications for research and practice.
British journal of special education, 39, 137-145.
*KART, A. N. 2022. Systematic Review of Studies on Visual Phonics. Communication
Disorders Quarterly, 43, 261-271.
*KLINGENBERG, O. G., H., H. A. & AUGESTAD, L. B. 2019. Research evidence for
mathematics education for students with visual impairment: A systematic review.
Cogent Education, 6, 1626322.
LAM, E. A., MCMASTER, K. L. & ROSE, S. 2020. Systematic Review of Curriculum-
Based Measurement with Students Who Are Deaf. The Journal of Deaf Studies
and Deaf Education, 25, 398-410.
LANDAU, S., RUSSELL, M., GOURGEY, K., ERIN, J. N. & COWAN, J. 2003. Use of the
Talking Tactile Tablet in Mathematics Testing. Journal of Visual Impairment &
Blindness, 97, 85-96.
LEE, E. J. & ZWICKER, J. G. 2021. Early identification of children with/at risk of
developmental coordination disorder: a scoping review. Developmental Medicine
& Child Neurology, 63, 649-658.
MAYER, C. & TREZEK, B. J. 2017. Literacy Outcomes in Deaf Students with Cochlear
Implants: Current State of the Knowledge. The Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf
Education, 23, 1-16.
54
MCDERMOTT-WELLS, P. M. 2015. Math in the Dark: Tools for Expressing Mathematical
Content by Visually Impaired Students. Available:
https://nsuworks.nova.edu/gscis_etd/61/ [Accessed 13/05/25].
MCINNES, J. M. & TREFFRY, J. A. 1982. Deaf-Blind Infants and Children
A Developmental Guide, University of Toronto Press.
MCLEOD, S. (2020). Intelligibility in Context Scale: Cross-linguistic use, validity and
reliability. Speech, Language and Hearing, 23(1), 9-16.
https://doi.org/10.1080/2050571X.2020.1718837.
MICHELSEN, S. I., ULDALL, P., KEJS, A. M. & MADSEN, M. 2005. Education and
employment prospects in cerebral palsy. Developmental Medicine and Child
Neurology, 47, 511-7.
MSALL, M. E., DIGAUDIO, K., ROGERS, B. T., LAFOREST, S., CATANZARO, N. L.,
CAMPBELL, J. & DUFFY, L. C. 1994. The functional independence measure for
children (WeeFIM). conceptual basis and pilot use in children with developmental
disabilities. Clinical Pediatrics, 33, 421-430.
*MUñOZ, K., EDITH, L., CATHERINE, C.-H., EDUARDO, O. & AND WHITE, K. 2015.
Evaluation of a hearing screening questionnaire for use with Ecuadorian school-
aged children. International Journal of Audiology, 54, 587-592.
MUTCH, L., ALBERMAN, E., HAGBERG, B., KODAMA, K. & PERAT, M. V. 1992.
Cerebral palsy epidemiology: where are we now and where are we going?
Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 34, 547-51.
OLUSANYA, B. O., NEUMANN, K. J. & SAUNDERS, J. E. 2014. The global burden of
disabling hearing impairment: a call to action. Bulletin World Health Organization,
92, 367-73.
OPIE, J., DEPPELER, J. & SOUTHCOTT, J. 2017. 'You have to be like everyone else':
Support for students with vision impairment in mainstream secondary schools.
Support for Learning, 32, 267-287.
PIEK, J.P. & DYCK, M. J. 2004. Sensory-motor deficits in children with developmental
coordination disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and autistic disorder.
Human Movement Science, 23, 475-88.
PRINSLOO, P., DADA, S., BASTABLE, K., RAGHAVENDRA, P. & GRANLUND, M.
2024. The application of the family of participation-related constructs (fPRC)
framework to AAC intervention outcomes in children with complex communication
55
needs: a scoping review. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 40, 182-
195.
ROSE, S., MCANALLY, P., BARKMEIER, L., VIRNIG, S. & LONG, J. 2008. Silent
Reading Fluency Test: Reliability, Validity, and Sensitivity to Growth for Students
Who Are Deaf and Hard of Hearing at the Elementary, Middle School, and High
School Levels. Research Institute on Progress Monitoring.
ROSENBAUM, P. & GORTER, J. W. 2012. The 'F-words' in childhood disability: I swear
this is how we should think! Child: Care, Health & Development, 38, 457-63.
ROSENBLUM, S. 2006. The development and standardization of the Children Activity
Scales (ChAS-P/T) for the early identification of children with Developmental
Coordination Disorders. Child: Care, Health & Development, 32, 619-32.
SHEA, B. J., REEVES, B. C., WELLS, G., THUKU, M., HAMEL, C., MORAN, J.,
MOHER, D., TUGWELL, P., WELCH, V., KRISTJANSSON, E. & HENRY, D.A.
2017. AMSTAR 2: a critical appraisal tool for systematic reviews that include
randomised or non-randomised studies of healthcare interventions, or both. British
Medical Journal, 358, j4008.
SUGDEN, D. A. 2006. Development Coordination as a Specific Learning Difficulty
[Online]. Available:
https://www.pearsonclinical.co.uk/content/dam/school/global/clinical/uk-
clinical/files/LeedsConsensus06-movement-
abc_2.pdf?srsltid=AfmBOoovQInlsdjliCypgpY-mFoewmU-
WIOusGxMs1xJxaatVHYSuvGF [Accessed 25/04/25].
*TUTTLE, M. & CARTER, E. W. 2022. A Review of Computer-Assisted Instruction for
Students With Visual Impairment. The Journal of Special Education, 56, 132-145.
*TUTTLE, M. & CARTER, E. W. 2023. Systematic Review of Studies Addressing
Computer-Assisted Instruction for Students with Visual Impairment. Journal of
Special Education Technology, 38, 274-287.
ULRICH, D. A. 1985. Test of Gross Motor Development (TGMD), Austin, TX, Pro-ED.
Inc.
VAN DER LINDE, B. W., VAN NETTEN, J. J., OTTEN, E., POSTEMA, K., GEUZE, R.H.
& SCHOEMAKER, M. M. 2015. A systematic review of instruments for
assessment of capacity in activities of daily living in children with developmental
co-ordination disorder. Child: Care, Health, and Development, 41, 23-34.
56
WANG, T.N., TSENG, M. H., WILSON, B. N. & HU, F. C. 2009. Functional performance
of children with developmental coordination disorder at home and at school.
Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 51, 817-25.
WANG, Y., & WILLIAMS, C. 2014. Are we hammering square pegs into round holes?: An
investigation of the meta-analyses of reading research with students who are
d/Deaf or hard of hearing and students who are hearing. American Annals of the
Deaf, 159(4), 323-345.
WILD, G. & STEELEY, S. L. 2018. A Model for Classroom-Based Intervention for
Children with Sensory Processing Differences. International Journal of Special
Education, 33, 745-765.
WILSON, B. N., CRAWFORD, S. G., GREEN, D., ROBERTS, G., AYLOTT, A. &
KAPLAN, B. J. 2009. Psychometric properties of the revised Developmental
Coordination Disorder Questionnaire. Physical & Occupational Therapy in
Pediatrics, 29, 182-202.
WONGKIA, W., NARUEDOMKUL, K. & CERCONE, N. 2012. i-Math: Automatic math
reader for Thai blind and visually impaired students. Computers & Mathematics
with Applications, 64, 2128-2140.
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 2023. Blindness and Vision Impairment [Online].
Available: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/blindness-and-visual.-
impairment [Accessed 25/04/25].
57
Department
for Education
© Department for Education Copyright 2025
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0,
except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit
nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3
Where we have identified any third-party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
Reference: RR1548
ISBN: 978-1-83870-701-9
For any enquiries regarding this publication, contact www.education.gov.uk/contactus.
This document is available for download at www.gov.uk/government/publications.
58
