Department
for Education
Identifying and supporting
children and young people
with social, emotional and
mental health needs: a
rapid evidence review
Research report
September 2025
Authors: Catherine Antalek, Fiona
Dixon, Daisy Loyd, Susanne Peter,
Amelia Roberts, Enxhi Sharxhi and
Matthew P. Somerville - University
College London
Government
Social Research
Disclaimer
This research does not constitute an endorsement by the Department for Education of
any of the approaches described. It does not reflect current Government policy, nor does
it indicate future policy direction. Materials, resources, websites, and commercially
developed programmes or products mentioned in this report are included solely because
they were identified and reviewed as part of the rapid evidence assessment. Other tools
or products with similar functions may exist and their absence from this report should not
be interpreted as a reflection of their effectiveness. Reference to specific named or third-
party products and materials should not be seen as an endorsement by either the
authors or the Department for Education of their use, or of any particular company or its
offerings.
1
Contents
Disclaimer
1
List of tables
4
Executive summary
5
Background
5
Approach
5
Key findings
5
Identification
5
Support
6
Conclusions
7
Introduction
8
Aims
10
Methods
11
Identification and assessment of need
13
Impact of knowledge, beliefs and training on identification of SEMH needs
19
Direct observation
20
Screening tools
21
Screening for SEMH needs summary
25
Progress monitoring tools
25
Progress monitoring for SEMH needs summary
27
Identification and assessment summary
28
Support and intervention
30
High quality teaching and universal support
31
Whole-school and whole-class strategies
32
Whole-school strategies
32
Whole-school support strategies summary
35
Whole-class strategies
35
Classroom-level support strategies summary
36
Instructional strategies
37
Instructional support strategies summary
41
2
Targeted intervention and support
41
Classroom behaviour and general attainment
41
Targeted approaches for classroom behaviour and general attainment summary43
Exam support for children and young people with ADHD
43
Targeted exam support for children and young people with ADHD summary
44
Self-regulation and organisation skills
44
Targeted self-regulation and organisational interventions summary
47
Reading interventions
47
Reading instruction approaches
47
Reading and behavioural interventions
48
Targeted reading interventions summary
52
Writing interventions
52
Summary of support and intervention findings
53
Conclusions
55
Appendices
56
Appendix A: Search terms (PICOS criteria)
56
References
60
3
List of tables
Table 1. Number of identified studies informing each strand
11
Table 2. Definitions of identification terms in the educational and clinical context
15
Table 3. Specialists and healthcare providers who may be involved in collaboration
17
4
Executive summary
Background
In the SEND Code of Practice (DfE/DoH, 2015), the area of Social, Emotional and Mental
Health (SEMH) needs refer to a wide range of emotional, behavioural, and social
challenges that can impact learning, engagement and participation, mental health, and
wellbeing for children and young people. This rapid evidence assessment (REA) reviews
how mainstream education professionals can identify and support SEMH needs in
children and young people, with a focus on improving educational outcomes including
participation and engagement.
Approach
The evidence was collected by means of a rapid evidence assessment (REA). A search
of the literature aimed to retrieve key findings for children and young people with SEMH
needs aged 0 to 25. The literature search focused on systematic reviews and meta-
analyses evaluating effective tools and strategies for the identification and support for
educational outcomes for children and young people with SEMH needs in mainstream
classrooms, as well as reviews evaluating collaborative practices between families,
schools, and healthcare providers or specialists.
Key findings
Our REA identified 15 studies evaluating methods of identification and assessment, and
33 studies examining interventions and support strategies that mainstream educators can
use to address SEMH needs.
Identification
It is important to foster a positive and supportive social and learning environment driven
by whole-school initiatives and supported by senior leaders for children and young
people with SEMH needs. To this end, key findings from our REA highlight the significant
impact of educators' understanding and beliefs surrounding SEMH needs.
Misunderstandings and stigma can negatively impact timely support and outcomes for
children with SEMH needs. Thus, comprehensive training and ongoing professional
development is important in developing a foundational understanding of mental health
and social and emotional needs of children and young people which underpins timely and
accurate identification and ongoing monitoring.
5
Although much of the evidence, particularly in relation to mental health difficulties,
focused on tools restricted to clinicians or specialists, our REA also identified several
reliable identification and assessment tools that can be used by mainstream educators.
Direct observation of behaviours or patterns of behaviours that is structured can be a
useful tool for both identification of needs and for progress monitoring. Structured
observations can identify areas where support may be needed and help inform
intervention plans for students with or at risk of developing SEMH needs.
Similarly, teacher nomination (based on professional judgement) can be a useful
screening method to identify children and young people who may demonstrate difficulties
in their setting and are in need of further assessment or support. However, our REA
found that structured screening tools such as questionnaires and checklists were found
to be more accurate than teacher nomination. This may be especially important in the
identification of internalising difficulties which are not always visible to teachers. One
such tool was the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire which was one of the most
frequently reviewed screening tools across studies in our REA and was useful in
screening for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), mental health, and as a
social-emotional and behavioural screener.
Although many screening tools may be effective and freely available to screen for SEMH
needs, these tools should be interpreted with caution by mainstream educators without
specialist qualifications. Even interpretation of the Strengths and Difficulties
Questionnaire results should be treated with caution. While this could be a useful tool for
intervention planning or flagging potential issues, it should not be used for labelling,
identifying specific personality traits or diagnosis. Rather these screeners should be used
to identify critical areas of need that may impact a student's academic performance. Our
REA also highlights that the identification and assessment of SEMH needs is most
effective when drawing on data from multiple informants (e.g., parents, teachers, and
pupils) and using a range of tools, as different informants notice different aspects and
tools vary in accuracy.
Support
In terms of support, at the whole-school level, approaches that reinforce positive
behaviours and provide a positive and supportive environment are important for allowing
pupils to develop and promote learning outcomes. Examples of effective whole-school
approaches were token economies and check-in/check-out systems which were found to
be effective, particularly for students with behavioural challenges, but only when
supported by strong senior leadership and applied flexibly to individual needs. A positive
school climate is crucial to ensure these strategies foster inclusion rather than alienation.
At the classroom level, targeted praise, rewards, choice in instruction, and hands-on
activities were associated with improved engagement and academic outcomes.
6
Instructional methods such as Direct Instruction, explicit teaching, scaffolding, modelling,
prompting, mnemonics, and daily report cards were consistently effective, reducing
cognitive load, supporting self-regulation, and strengthening home-school
communication.
Targeted interventions reinforced these findings, with Self-Regulated Strategy
Development showing positive effects on writing and skills such as organisation and
monitoring, though some strategies require specialist training. Reading interventions
highlighted the consistent effectiveness of Direct Instruction programmes (e.g. Corrective
Reading, Reading Mastery, Sound Partners, Stepping Stones to Literacy), particularly for
younger pupils. Peer-mediated approaches and small-group delivery also showed
promise, though repeated reading produced weaker effects. Evidence for combined
reading-behaviour interventions was mixed.
Conclusions
This REA highlighted some key gaps in the evidence base for identification, assessment,
and support for children and young people with SEMH. First, many screening tools in the
evidence base had a lack of standardisation or required specialist training for use, limiting
their practical application in school settings. Further, there was a disproportionate focus
on externalising behaviours, particularly those associated with ADHD. This focus limits
the extent to which internalising behaviours may be identified and supported for children
and young people with SEMH which could lead to poorer academic outcomes, or a lack
of participation and engagement. More research is needed here to provide an evidence-
base for tools that can be used and feasibly implemented in mainstream education
settings.
Further, a substantial proportion of studies relied on single-case designs, which provide
useful insights into individual responses but limit generalisability. More robust, teacher-
led evaluations in mainstream school contexts are needed to establish effectiveness at
scale.
The role of the pupil voice was also underrepresented. Although this REA emphasised
the importance of including identification and assessment tools that rely on the pupil as
an informant, there was a lack of research on how students may self-identify or have a
role in planning their support. Embedding pupil perspectives into the identification and
support process could help ensure that assessment is not only systematic and structured
but also that support is properly aligned with pupil need and preference.
7
Introduction
In England, during the 2024/25 academic year, approximately 1.44 million pupils with
identified special educational needs (SEN) are educated in mainstream state-funded
primary and secondary schools. This includes around 1.17 million pupils receiving SEN
support, and a further 271,000 pupils with an Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan.
As of 2025, 23.6% of pupils (279,230 pupils) receiving SEN support have Social,
Emotional and Mental Health (SEMH) difficulties identified as their primary need,
alongside 16% (71,304 pupils) with an EHC plan (DfE, 2025). SEMH needs refer to a
wide range of emotional, behavioural, and social challenges that can impact learning,
engagement and participation, mental health, and wellbeing. In recent years, there has
been ongoing debate regarding the terminology used to describe children with SEMH
difficulties. The term Social, Emotional and Mental Health (SEMH) was introduced in the
revised SEND Code of Practice (DfE/DoH, 2015) as a broad, needs-based descriptor for
pupils who "experience a wide range of social and emotional difficulties." Prior to this
revision, terminology in both policy and research typically emphasised behavioural
presentation, with terms such as Emotional and Behavioural Difficulties (EBD) or Social,
Emotional and Behavioural Difficulties (SEBD). These earlier terms have been criticised
for their ambiguity and for lacking clear diagnostic boundaries, potentially leading to
inconsistency in identification and support. To reflect current policy and promote a needs-
led perspective, this rapid evidence assessment (REA) adopts the term SEMH in
alignment with the SEND Code of Practice (DfE/DoH, 2015).
As defined in the SEND Code of Practice (DfE/DoH, 2015), SEMH needs refer not to a
specific diagnosis but to a broad category of need that may be expressed through
externalising behaviours (e.g., aggression, oppositionality) or internalising behaviours
(e.g., anxiety, withdrawal), often in combination. For example, one pupil may present with
persistent defiance and disruption, while another may appear quiet and disengaged, yet
both may be struggling with underlying emotional distress. Additionally, SEMH needs
frequently co-occur with other learning or developmental needs, including language or
communication difficulties, literacy difficulties, and autism, which can lead to a complex
profile of strengths and challenges requiring holistic assessment and support. This review
adopts a needs-based perspective in line with the SEND Code of Practice (DfE/DoH,
2015), recognising the importance of identifying and responding to individual profiles
rather than focusing solely on behaviours or labels. However, it can be useful to
conceptualise the distinct characteristics of conditions that fall under the SEMH category
such as ADHD, anxiety, or depression, as a way of better understanding how they
present in educational settings. These are described briefly in the following paragraphs.
Children with SEMH needs may experience a range of underlying mental health
difficulties, the most common being anxiety and depression. Anxiety disorders account
for approximately 40% of mental health disorders in children (UNICEF, 2021), with
8
conditions such as generalised anxiety disorder (GAD), social anxiety disorder (SAD),
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) often
affecting school participation and performance. These disorders manifest through a
variety of symptoms, including emotional, behavioural, and physiological changes, and
require sensitive recognition and support from educational professionals. Anxiety is
particularly prevalent in neurodivergent populations, including autistic children, where
comorbid rates are significantly elevated (van Steensel et al., 2011).
Mood disorders such as major depression and bipolar disorder also affect a smaller but
significant proportion of school-aged children, with rates increasing through adolescence
(WHO, 2024). These conditions may present as persistent low mood, loss of motivation,
emotional volatility, or suicidal ideation, and frequently intersect with school
disengagement, poor academic outcomes, and social difficulties. Again, prevalence is
higher among children with neurodevelopmental conditions, particularly autism.
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is characterised by persistent challenges
with inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity (defined as action taken without foresight)
(Lange et al., 2010). These pupils may exhibit externalising behaviours (e.g.,
hyperactivity, oppositionality) or internalising symptoms (e.g., anxiety, low self-esteem),
particularly when ADHD co-occurs with other conditions.
The development and expression of SEMH needs are shaped by a range of interacting
factors including biological vulnerability, school experience, trauma exposure,
discrimination, and the presence of other special educational needs or disabilities.
Without timely identification and support, SEMH needs can escalate and contribute to
long-term adverse outcomes, such as academic underachievement, exclusion, and
reduced participation in education, employment, or training (Arnold & Baker, 2013; Hurry
et al., 2018; Martin-Denham, 2020; Nye et al., 2016). It is therefore important that schools
and early years settings adopt a proactive, evidence-informed approach to the early
identification and educational support of SEMH, framed by collaboration with families and
specialist services.
This review focuses specifically on two of the most commonly presenting needs of SEMH
needs within school contexts: externalising and internalising difficulties. These were
selected not only due to their prevalence but because of their strong association with
reduced educational attainment, school disengagement, and Emotionally Based School
Avoidance (EBSA). For example, pupils with ADHD often experience difficulties with
attention, impulse control, and behavioural regulation that disrupt classroom routines and
social relationships, while those with anxiety may quietly disengage or avoid school
altogether. Children who experience externalising and/or internalising difficulties
frequently struggle to access and participate fully in learning without timely and
appropriate support.
9
Aims
The goal of this review is to synthesise evidence-based strategies in the identification,
support, and collaborative practices available to mainstream teachers in supporting
children and young people with SEMH difficulties. Our research questions are as follows.
Identification:
Which formal and informal methods and measurement tools are available to
practitioners to identify SEMH needs within diverse classroom settings?
For which ages or age ranges can these tools be used?
What are the performance parameters of these measurement tools (e.g.,
reliability/validity/specificity)?
How can these tools be used to guide decisions regarding the provision of
universal, targeted or specialist support?
Support:
What are the most effective universal and targeted strategies, approaches, or
adaptations for supporting children and young people with SEMH needs to
improve educational outcomes?
What is the most appropriate level of delivery (universal, targeted or
specialist) for each of these interventions?
What specific age groups are targeted by these interventions?
What types of approaches/interventions do children with SEMH needs respond
best to?
Working with others:
What components and characteristics foster effective collaboration between
teachers, specialists, and parents/caregivers in the identification and support
for children and young people with SEMH. How can clear role boundaries and
knowledge-sharing frameworks support this process?
What examples are there of different models of collaboration between the
multidisciplinary team?
10
Methods
To address these research questions, a Rapid Evidence Assessment (REA) was
conducted following Cochrane rapid review guidance (Garritty et al., 2024). This REA
followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis
(PRISMA) statement when selecting relevant articles.
We conducted a targeted search in October 2024 of two academic databases (i.e.,
Scopus: PsychINFO and EBSCO: ERIC) as well as grey literature using specific
keywords related to the research questions (see Appendix A: Search terms). We
identified systematic reviews and meta-analyses published in English between 2014 and
2024, focusing on children and young people aged 0-25 with identified SEMH difficulties
in mainstream educational settings. Included studies evaluated identification, support, or
collaborative practices that are feasible in UK classrooms, excluding medical, home-
based, or highly resource-dependent interventions (e.g. beyond what is typically available
in a mainstream classroom such as animals, robotics and virtual reality). Identification
tools had to be usable by mainstream staff (not clinicians), and SEND status were
independently verified through diagnosis, EHC plan, or standardised measures. Studies
relying solely on teacher judgement were excluded. Studies reporting measurable
educational attainment outcomes (e.g., maths, science, literacy or general attainment)
were included (i.e., excluding behavioural, social or emotional outcomes).
Titles and abstracts were initially screened for relevance by trained members of the team,
followed by full-text review, resulting in the inclusion of 48 studies in the final review, with
15 studies on identification and assessment, and 33 studies on support and intervention
(see Table 1). Given the central role of collaboration across both the identification and
intervention processes, this strand is not presented as a standalone section. Instead,
within the identification and support sections, we highlight where collaborative practices
are necessary and effective. Additionally, as many studies identified for inclusion relate to
collaborative practices in general SEND provision or across different areas of need, a
breakdown of studies specific to SEMH is not included here, with collaborative practices
across the categories of SEND addressed in the Cross-Cutting Themes Report.
Table 1. Number of identified studies informing each strand
Strand
Number of studies included
Identification and assessment
15
Support and intervention
33
Total
48
Data from each study were then extracted by trained members of the team. We extracted
descriptive information regarding the characteristics of each study as well as information
11
about identification tools and support strategies from the included paper(s) where
available.
Our search efforts prioritised high-quality and relevant research, ensuring the inclusion of
peer-reviewed studies and robust methodologies. All studies identified in the final sample
are either systematic reviews or meta-analyses. To evaluate the quality of these studies,
we used the Assessing the Methodology Quality of Systematic Reviews tool 2
(AMSTAR2; Shea et al., 2017). Quality assessment suggested that the evidence base is
mixed according to this tool. Most studies were rated as high or moderate confidence in
the results, with some rated as low due to a 'critical flaw' (detailed in our Technical
Report). The most frequent critical flaw was that many studies did not conduct a formal
risk of bias assessment using a recognised tool (e.g., ROBINS-I, Cochrane Risk of Bias).
For a full account of our methodology including search terms, inclusion, and exclusion
criteria, PRISMA flow diagram, and extraction variables, and quality appraisal see the
Technical Report.
12
Identification and assessment of need
The aim of this section is to review the studies retrieved by our search that focused on
identification and assessment strategies suitable for use by mainstream education
professionals in identifying children with SEMH needs. These approaches can help
teachers and school staff in recognising students' strengths and challenges, guide
decisions about support, or highlight cases where referral for specialist assessment may
be warranted.
It is important to emphasise that subject and class teachers are not responsible for the
formal identification or assessment of learners' needs. In line with the SEND Code of
Practice (DfE, 2015), their role is to support the early recognition of students who may be
experiencing difficulties, particularly those affecting educational progress. Therefore, the
approaches identified in this REA are not intended to diagnose any conditions, but they
can help mainstream educators in recognising children and young people's strengths and
challenges to guide decisions about support or to highlight cases where referral for
specialist assessment may be warranted. Where concerns are identified, these should be
discussed with the school's Special Educational Needs Coordinator (SENCo) and the
child's family to determine appropriate next steps, including referral and formal
assessment where necessary. These processes are often involved in the graduated
approach, outlined in the SEND Code of Practice (2015). The graduated approach is a
four-stage process used by schools to identify and respond to SEND. It involves (1)
assessing a child's needs, (2) planning appropriate support, (3) delivering that support,
and (4) reviewing its effectiveness. The class or subject teacher remains responsible for
implementing support, with guidance from the SENCo and, where appropriate, external
specialists. It is primarily used for pupils receiving SEN support (those without an
Education, Health and Care Plan) and aims to ensure that needs are met in a timely and
responsive way.
Further, although many screening and assessment tools may be effective at identification
and needs-based assessment, these tools should be interpreted with caution by
mainstream educators without specialist qualifications. This is because many screening
tools and assessments are founded on psychometric principles (e.g., reliability, validity,
and standardisation) which determine how the results should be interpreted and used.
Without specific training in these areas, it may be difficult to interpret how scores
compare to typically developing populations or whether they represent meaningful results
or what it means when scores fall within clinical ranges. In practice, this ambiguity places
greater reliance on professional judgement, which can lead to variability in how results
are interpreted, particularly among assessors with limited initial training or experience
with complex learning profiles or co-occurring difficulties. While educators play a vital role
in completing these tools as informants, accurate interpretation should typically be
assisted by an individual with specialist training. While the strategies detailed in this REA
13
can be useful for intervention planning or flagging potential issues, they should not be
used for labelling or identifying specific personality traits or diagnosis. Rather these tools
should be used to identify critical areas of need that may impact a student's academic
performance.
The terms 'identification', 'screening', 'assessment', and 'profiling' are often used
inconsistently across research, policy, and practice and can have different meanings in
relation to educational versus clinical practice. For example, the term 'screening' in an
educational context typically refers to the process by which a tool or a strategy is used to
flag potential needs in a population (e.g., whole-school or whole-class) to inform
provision of timely support or targeted interventions in educational settings. In contrast,
screening for clinical purposes is typically carried out by health or mental health
professionals using standardised tools to determine whether a child meets criteria for a
specific diagnosis, such as ADHD, with the goal of planning for further assessment or
clinical treatment. However, some processes can overlap. For example, a school-based
behavioural checklist such as the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) might
be used to identify early signs of social, emotional, or behavioural difficulties, prompting
classroom-level support or pastoral interventions. That same tool could also be used by
mental health professionals as part of a broader assessment for SEMH-related
diagnoses, such as anxiety disorders or ADHD, or to track response to intervention over
time. For clarity throughout this document, we define each term within an educational
context. Definitions of terms are provided in Table 2.
14
Table 2. Definitions of identification terms in the educational and clinical context
Term
Educational use
Clinical use
Needs-based
The process of recognising that a
Not a formal clinical term;
identification
child may have additional
overlaps with early signs that
educational needs (whether they do
may prompt diagnostic
or do not have a diagnosis), often
referral but is not sufficient for
based on parental or child concern,
diagnosis.
observations, or professional
judgement; however, this process
can also include informal
assessments.
Informal assessments are flexible
methods of gathering data to identify
areas of need, guide interventions
and monitor progress. These tools
include checklists, questionnaires,
or more structured assessments
(e.g., handwriting speed, reading
fluency).
Screening
A brief tool or procedure used to flag
Tools used to determine
or identify potential strengths and
whether further diagnostic
challenges across a population. In
assessment is warranted,
educational contexts, the goal is to
often as a first step in a
flag potential needs early so that
medical or psychological
timely support or targeted
evaluation pathway.
interventions can be put in place
Typically, these tools should
within the school setting. Screeners
meet certain principles and
are not diagnostic tools but
should be administered by a
designed to flag potential risk.
trained specialist (UK Health
However, given that screeners are
Security Agency, 2015).
typically quick to complete and
usually measure only a specific area
of concern, they should be
interpreted with caution.
15
Term
Educational use
Clinical use
Assessment
Refers to a systematic structured
A systematic and structured
process of data gathering from
process of data collection for
standardised tools to understand
diagnostic purposes.
individual strengths and needs in
Assessment is conducted by
order to plan intervention or monitor
specialists (e.g., educational
progress. For educational purposes,
psychologists) and involves
these can be informal or formal
standardised diagnostic tools
assessments.
to determine specific
Formal assessments are structured,
conditions or development
standardised tools used to evaluate
profiles
a student's performance against
national or normative standards.
These include GCSEs and A-levels
but also standardised assessments
of literacy or other types of skills.
Formal assessments sometimes
require input from specialists to
administer and/or interpret results.
Formal assessment may result in a
diagnosis or eligibility for additional
provision such as exam access
arrangements.
Profiling
A holistic summary of a child's
Less commonly used as a
functioning, strengths, and areas of
standalone concept;
difficulty, often used to guide
elements of profiling are
provision. Includes data from
embedded in comprehensive
multiple informants and through
diagnostic assessments that
multiple methods.
explore functional impact
across domains.
Unlike conditions such as ADHD, depression, or anxiety, SEMH difficulties itself is not a
clinical diagnosis. Instead, SEMH difficulties is a descriptor of a range of challenges used
within educational contexts such as difficulties with emotion regulation, social interaction,
or mental health that impact the ability to engage in learning. In the UK, SEMH needs are
identified largely through educational assessment rather than formal medical diagnosis,
although clinical diagnoses may sometimes be involved for certain conditions like
anxiety, depression, or ADHD.
Identification may begin in school, where teachers or other staff observe behaviours in a
child or young person that are influencing their engagement or participation in learning.
16
These behaviours, such as persistent disruptive behaviour, emotional withdrawal,
difficulty forming relationships, or signs of anxiety or low mood may indicate SEMH
needs. It is also important to be aware that children sometimes express mental health
problems through physical symptoms rather than words. For example, teachers or staff
might observe unexplained physical complaints (like headaches or stomach-aches),
changes in eating habits or sleep disturbances (Morabito et al., 2021).
Schools follow a graduated approach to assessing and supporting these needs, using the
cycle of "Assess, Plan, Do, Review." This involves gathering information through
observation, discussion with parents and carers, and use of informal assessment tools. If
a pupil's needs are complex or do not respond to school-based interventions, external
professionals such as educational psychologists, Child and Adolescent Mental Health
Services (CAMHS), or local authority SEMH teams may be involved. These services can
offer specialist assessment and input, and in some cases may lead to a formal diagnosis
of a mental health condition such as depression, anxiety or ADHD. However, a diagnosis
is not required for SEMH support to be put in place. See Table 3 for a list of specialists
and healthcare professionals who may be involved in the identification and support
processes for children and young people with SEMH.
Table 3. Specialists and healthcare providers who may be involved in collaboration
Specialist
Role
Clinical Psychologist
May be part of CAMHS. Assesses behaviour,
cognition, and emotional functioning; may
administer diagnostic tools and standard
assessments. May also provide treatment or
manage mental health conditions.
Educational Psychologist
May be part of CAMHS. Provides insights from
school-based assessments; contributes to
understanding educational needs.
Emotional Literacy Support
ELSAs are usually school-based staff who receive
Assistant (ELSA)
specialist training to deliver support focussed on
emotional regulation and social relationships.
General Practitioner (GP)
First point of contact for families; makes referrals to
specialist services.
Occupational Therapist (OT)
May be part of CAMHS. Evaluates sensory
processing, motor coordination, and functional
independence.
17
Specialist
Role
Paediatrician
May be part of CAMHS. Leads or participates in
developmental assessments; takes detailed
medical/developmental history.
Psychiatrist
May be part of CAMHS. Medical doctors that may
diagnose and manage more complex mental health
conditions or prescribe medication.
School SENCo or Teacher
Provides observational reports and educational
context; may flag concerns to parents/GP.
Social Worker (if involved)
Contributes family background or safeguarding
information where relevant.
Where SEMH needs are severe and long-term, schools or families may request an EHC
plan. An EHC plan outlines the child's needs, and the support required across education,
health, and social care. While some children with SEMH may have diagnosed mental
health conditions, others may not have a formal diagnosis but still present significant
needs that warrant intervention and support. Thus, educators must be vigilant in
recognising SEMH needs, which may be secondary to other types of SEND. However,
identification of difficulties associated with SEMH may be difficult, resulting in variation in
timely assessment and support.
As stated in the introduction of this review, children with SEMH needs may exhibit
internalising and externalising symptoms which may affect academic outcomes.
Internalising and externalising behaviours are two broad categories used to describe how
children and young people may express social, emotional, and mental health difficulties
and are often part of SEMH identification and assessment. Internalising problems refer to
difficulties that are directed inward, such as anxiety, depression, withdrawal, low self-
esteem, and excessive worry. These behaviours may not be immediately disruptive in the
classroom but can significantly affect a child's well-being and ability to engage in
learning. Children with internalising problems might appear quiet, passive, or overly
compliant, which can lead to their needs being overlooked.
Externalising behaviours are outwardly directed actions such as aggression, defiance,
hyperactivity, and disruptive conduct. These behaviours, including physical, verbal, and
gestural aggression, classroom disruption, and off-task activity, are frequently observed
in students identified with emotional and behavioural difficulties (Walker et al., 2004).
Externalising behaviours may also present differently between girls and boys. For
example, girls may be better at masking or developing compensatory strategies to avoid
negative social consequences (Hinshaw et al., 2021; Mansfield & Soni, 2024; Quinn &
Madhoo, 2014). However, this difference in presentation should not always be assumed.
It is important to recognise that both internalising and externalising problems can stem
18
from underlying emotional distress, and children may move between the two categories
over time. Effective support requires a holistic understanding of a child's emotional world,
rather than focusing only on the behaviours that are most noticeable.
Identification of SEMH needs in schools should be systematic, structured, and proactive
to ensure timely support. Teachers and other school-based educators can play an
important role in the identification and assessment of SEMH needs and there are a
number of different methods that can be employed. These methods may include teacher
nomination, structured direct observations, examining attendance records, academic
performance, behavioural logs or universal screening (parent, teacher, or student report).
These methods are discussed in the following sections.
Impact of knowledge, beliefs and training on identification of
SEMH needs
Before exploring the tools and methods used to identify, screen, and assess children and
young people with SEMH needs, it is important to first consider how understandings of
mental health and behavioural challenges, as well as the beliefs and stigma surrounding
it, can influence early identification and access to support in mainstream educational
settings. One major theme that emerged across the studies included in the current REA
is that knowledge, beliefs, and understanding of SEMH needs from educational
professionals can influence accurate and timely identification as well as professional
help-seeking (e.g., for referral or intervention planning) and support options (e.g., Jorm,
2012; Jorm et al., 1997; Martin-Denham, 2021). Misconceptions and stigma surrounding
SEMH needs especially around mental health and ADHD are common. Educational
professionals may also hold these misunderstandings themselves (e.g., Sciutto, et al.,
2000; 2016). This can be problematic as negative beliefs and attitudes towards SEMH
can influence support strategies and student performance outcomes (e.g., Sherman et
al., 2008). Thus, it is important that educational professionals have a foundational
understanding of SEMH needs and how these needs may influence engagement and
participation in learning with accurate and up-to-date information to effectively identify
and provide support for students with SEMH needs.
Three systematic reviews in our REA specifically investigated the impact of teacher and
school staff's knowledge, understanding, and beliefs about SEMH on identification.
According to a systematic review by Johnson and colleagues (2023) teachers with
greater knowledge of ADHD were more likely to recognise the need for professional
assessment and to express an intention to seek help for a child showing signs of the
condition. In contrast, educators with less knowledge were more inclined to manage the
child's difficulties on their own, without external support. In some cases that were
reported, teachers with more negative beliefs about ADHD (e.g., the belief that ADHD
students have lower IQ than non-ADHD students) were less likely to use evidence-based
19
behavioural management strategies. However, findings also indicated that teachers'
knowledge and understanding of mental health and ADHD may improve with first-hand
experience with children with these difficulties and through specialised training
programmes. Johnson et al.'s (2023) review also demonstrated that teacher training
could lead to more positive attitudes and beliefs about conditions such as ADHD, which
in turn may lead to increased use of evidence-based behavioural management
strategies. Another review investigating early identification of eating disorders also found
that training led to better identification of eating disorder by school staff (Kalindjian et al.,
2022).
A third review (Olssen et al., 2023) found that some of teachers' perceptions of pupils'
ADHD-related difficulties may be influenced by gender. For example, teachers tended to
rate girls' academic, social, or emotional challenges as more severe than boys', even
when impairments were comparable. However, the review also noted that these
gendered perceptions did not appear to influence the instructional strategies or
interventions teachers selected in response.
While the studies in this REA did not examine specific training programmes, findings
suggest that providing teachers and school staff with information on definitions, signs and
symptoms, causes, effects, and treatment options can enhance understanding of SEMH
needs. For example, training such as Mental Health First Aid has been shown to improve
mental health literacy among educators (Morgan et al., 2018). Similarly, a systematic
review and meta-analysis by Ward et al. (2022) found that ADHD-specific teacher
training programmes significantly improved teachers' knowledge and positive behaviours
towards pupils with ADHD-type behaviours. However, there was limited evidence that
these interventions led to measurable improvements in pupil outcomes, highlighting the
need for training to be embedded within broader systems of support.
Direct observation
Direct observation of different behaviours and patterns can be a useful way of identifying
SEMH and related needs. Direct observation offers real-time insight into a child's
behaviours at a specific time point (e.g., during classroom transitions) or during a specific
task (e.g., a whole-class literacy task). It allows for more objective data collection (versus
questionnaire responses which can be more subjective) and can capture non-verbal cues
such as body language, facial expressions, or movement which can indicate emotional or
sensory needs.
Direct observation may involve coding behaviours by hand. For example, an observer will
record what a child is doing every 30 seconds during an activity such as a science
lesson. However, this form of direct observation can be very time-consuming and
requires the observer to have some training in the use of structured tools (e.g., interval
20
recording, frequency counts, event sampling) and in using coding systems reliably,
ensuring inter-rater consistency if multiple observers are involved. Digital approaches
such as Multi-Option Observation System for Experimental Studies (MOOSES; Tapp &
Wehby, 1993), Behavioural Observation of Students in Schools© (BOSS; Shapiro 2011),
and the Mainstream Code for Instructional Structure and Student Academic Response
(MS-CISSAR; Greenwood et al., 2000) can be helpful in minimising the resource burden
and in maintaining reliability and consistency of observations.
One review demonstrated that direct observation by hand or via computer-assisted
approaches can be helpful in investigating a behaviour of interest in order to track
progress over time and guide the choice of interventions (Adamson, 2014). However,
screeners may be more useful in providing standardised findings which may be more
consistent and reliable.
Screening tools
Screeners for children and young people at risk of developing or experiencing social,
emotional, behavioural, or academic difficulties that may affect their learning and
wellbeing in school can be useful tools in the identification and assessment process.
They may help evaluate an entire classroom or all students in a mainstream setting to
flag potential needs for intervention purposes or for referral for formal diagnostic
assessment. Research findings across the studies identified in our search indicate that
there are a number of different ways that students can be screened by educators in
school settings. One method of screening which can also aid in clinical assessment or
further educational assessment and support planning is via teacher nomination. Here,
teachers indicate the students that they believe may be struggling with internalising or
externalising difficulties based on their day-to-day observations and professional
judgement. Questionnaires and checklists can be completed by teachers, parents, or
students themselves. Tools completed by teachers can provide insight into classroom
behaviour and how learning may be affected. Parent-report tools can give important
information on behaviour in different setting such as in the home or different community
settings. Student-report tools may be useful in giving more direct insight into the internal
thoughts and feelings which can be helpful for identifying less visible internalising issues
such as low mood or social anxiety. These methods will be discussed in more detail
related to their evidence in the subsequent paragraphs.
Becker-Haims et al (2020) reviewed available brief, free, and accessible measures of
overall mental health, anxiety, depression, disruptive behaviour, traumatic stress,
disordered eating, suicidality, bipolar/mania, psychosis, and substance use that can be
used to guide mental health care provision. While most of these tools are intended for
clinical screening use and require specialist interpretation, the Strengths and Difficulties
Questionnaire (SDQ) stands out as a reliable and accessible mental health screening
21
tool that can also be used by mainstream educators to identify areas of need in everyday
school settings. The SDQ was also found to be a useful social-emotional and behavioural
screener in another systematic review (i.e., Jenkins et al, 2014) and as a screener for
ADHD in another systematic review in our REA (i.e., Mulraney et al., 2022).
The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ; Goodman, 2001) is a brief
behavioural screening tool designed to identify emotional and behavioural issues in
children and young people aged 2 to 17. The questionnaire consists of 25 items divided
into five subscales: emotional symptoms, conduct problems, hyperactivity/inattention,
peer relationship difficulties, and prosocial behaviour. The first four subscales combine to
form a Total Difficulties Score, while the prosocial scale is reported separately to highlight
the child's strengths. There are versions of the SDQ for parents (ages 2-17), teachers
(ages 4-17), and self-report by young people (ages 11-17). It typically takes 5 to 10
minutes to complete and can be administered on paper or digitally. Respondents are
asked to rate each item in the questionnaire based on their observations of the child. The
SDQ is freely available for use on the official SDQ website. According to developers, this
tool is not recommended for progress monitoring of interventions.
Allen et al. (2018) reviewed 18 screeners that can be used to assess internalising
behavioural risk. These screeners were categorised as either Broadband screening tools
or Narrowband screening tools. Broadband screening tools assess a wide range of
behavioural, emotional, and social domains to identify general areas of concern (e.g., the
Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire), and are useful for initial screening across
multiple conditions. On the other hand, narrowband screening tools target specific
disorders or symptom clusters (e.g., the Conners 3 ADHD Index), providing more
detailed information about a particular area of concern and supporting diagnostic
decisions or intervention planning. Their review analysed a variety of behaviour rating
scales, teacher nomination processes, student-completed rating scales, and peer
nomination of classroom peers. Findings suggested that these screening methods are
generally effective, and research supports the use of both broad and specific screening
tools for identifying internalising difficulties in students. These tools can be used either on
their own or as part of a wider assessment of students' emotional and behavioural needs.
Although most of these screeners should be administered and interpreted by trained
clinicians or specialists, there are four tools that can be used by mainstream educators
without specialist qualifications:
1. The Social, Academic, Emotional Behavior Risk Screener (SAEBRS; Kilgus & von
der Embse, 2014) is a US-based teacher observation rating scale that may be
completed using a computer or tablet. Ratings correspond to the frequency of
various behaviours in the previous month (Never, Sometimes, Often, Almost
Always). Schools can use this screener for school-aged children to identify
students who are at risk for social, academic, and emotional behaviours.
22
2. The Student Internalizing Behavior Screening Scale (SIBS; Cook et al., 2011) is
another US-developed student self-report scale that measures internalising
behaviours in children and adolescents. This tool can help educators identify risk
factors (such as anxiety or depression) that may negatively impact students'
academic and personal lives. This scale can be administered up to two times a
year to monitor progress.
3. The SIBS can be used in tandem with the Student Risk Screening Scale -
Internalizing and Externalizing (SRSS-IE; Drummond, 1994; Lane & Menzies,
2009). This tool is a brief, teacher-completed behavioural screening tool used in
schools to help identify students who may be at risk for internalising and
externalising difficulties. This tool can also be used for monitoring purposes.
4. Finally, the Effective Behavior Support (EBS; Sugai & Horner, 2002) tools were
found to be effective. EBS is not a specific tool itself, but a framework (part of the
Positive Behavioural Interventions and Supports) and includes tools like checklists
and screening protocols that are completed by teachers.
However, the review by Allen et al (2018) found that these screeners were not strong at
predicting outcomes like behaviour referrals, suspensions, or academic performance.
Hence, if schools want to predict those outcomes, alternatives tests may be needed. The
research also does not clearly show which informants (e.g., teachers VS. students) or the
ages that are best for using these screeners. Some studies suggested teachers are more
accurate informants for younger children, while students may be better at reporting their
own emotional needs in secondary school. More research is needed to confirm these
patterns across different settings and age groups. Therefore, it is recommended that
these screeners are used with the help of clinicians or specialists who are trained in their
use.
Each screening method discussed offers a distinct perspective, drawing on different
sources of information and carrying its own strengths and limitations. However, results
from one systematic review indicate that one screening tool completed by a single
reporter is not likely to accurately flag every SEMH case in large-scale screening (e.g.,
Mulraney et al., 2022). Further, evidence suggests that the choice of screening tool (and
informant) may influence outcomes. For example, Keating et al. (2022) found that
reported rates of sensory modulation difficulties (SMD) in children with ADHD varied
depending on the type of assessment used. Caregiver reports and behavioural tools tend
to identify more difficulties than physiological measures. This suggests that tool selection
should be guided by the specific focus of screening and the goal of the screening
process. For example, caregiver report may be most useful for measuring daily
behaviours, while psychological tools may be more useful for understanding underlying
mechanisms driving those behaviours.
23
Similarly, Anderson et al. (2019) reviewed studies comparing different methods of
identifying anxiety and depression, behavioural and socioemotional difficulties, and risk of
suicide. Although these findings do not focus on evaluating specific screening tools, they
offer valuable insight into which informants are most effective in completing screening
tools for different types of difficulties, and how the use of screeners compares to teacher
nomination. The results of Anderson et al.'s (2019) review indicated that when screening
for depression, teacher nomination might be more accurate than universal screening
tools but may still have high rates of false positives (up to 70% of children flagged for
depression did not actually have depression). In terms of social anxiety, screening may
be more accurate with only 20% of false positives while teacher nomination often missed
identification of students later diagnosed with social anxiety. While some studies in this
review did suggest that teachers could correctly accurately identify a higher proportion
(41-68%) of students who screen positive for depression or anxiety, these studies lacked
follow-up clinical interviews, which makes it difficult to know exactly how reliable these
numbers are. It is also important to note that while teachers may notice signs or
indicators of mental health difficulties, is it not their responsibility to diagnose these
difficulties. Identification of mental health difficulties should be treated with sensitivity, to
ensure that results are interpreted carefully and, where necessary, followed up with
appropriate professional assessment rather than being used as stand-alone indicators.
In terms of behavioural and social emotional difficulties, structured screening tools such
as checklists were generally found to be more accurate than teacher nomination and
other methods such as examination of attendance. Suggesting that these tools may be
more reliable than teacher observations. Findings suggested that both parents and
teachers are typically more accurate at identifying children at risk of externalising than
internalising difficulties. Similarly, student-report screeners identified twice as many at-
risk students as teacher nomination, especially in terms of internalising difficulties. This
result likely occurred because teachers are more likely to notice and nominate students
with more obvious or severe difficulties, such as frequent disruptive behaviour. Screeners
may also be better than teacher nomination at identifying ADHD needs. This was also
supported in the review by Mulraney et al. (2022) who found that parent-report and
student self-report were the most accurate when screening for ADHD, however, teacher-
report scales can still be effective (Staff et al., 2021). The accuracy of teacher-nomination
was also found to be low for students at risk of suicide.
In another systematic review of screening methods, Garcia-Rosales et al. (2024)
investigated agreement between parent report and teacher report on screeners for ADHD
behaviours. Most studies showed strong agreement between parent and teacher ratings
of ADHD symptoms, meaning both groups understood and used the symptom criteria in
similar ways. However, there were some differences in how parents versus teachers
rated behaviours. Parents tended to rate some behaviours, like carelessness,
forgetfulness, and being overly active, more strongly, while teachers rated other
24
behaviour like difficulty waiting or interrupting more strongly. Parents were also quicker to
say a child was not listening or was easily distracted, while teachers were quicker to say
a child did not follow instructions. Despite these differences, both groups agreed
consistently when rating behaviours like being disorganised, unmotivated, fidgety,
talkative, or struggling to stay seated.
Finally, the accuracy of student self-reporting may vary by age. Internalising difficulties
such as anxiety and depression tend to increase in prevalence during adolescence, and
older students may have greater metacognitive awareness and capacity for self-
reflection. This means secondary-aged pupils are generally better able to recognise and
report internal states than younger children, who may lack the developmental maturity to
accurately articulate their experiences (Villarreal et al., 2022). This developmental
difference has important implications for how schools interpret pupil-reported data and
choose age-appropriate assessment tools.
Taken together, the findings from these systematic reviews suggest that screening may
be the most effective method of school-based identification of mental health risk,
however, the rate of false-positive results is still high. Screening from multiple informants
may provide more holistic insight. For example, student-report screening may be best to
identify internalising difficulties while teacher or parent-report screening might provide
insight into externalising difficulties. A combination of teacher nomination and screening
may improve accuracy, but further research is needed to confirm this.
Screening for SEMH needs summary
The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire
The Social, Academic, Emotional Behavior Risk Screener
The Student Internalizing Behavior Screening Scale
Student Risk Screening Scale - Internalizing and Externalizing
The Effective Behavior Support
Teacher nomination may be useful, but structured screening tools may be more
accurate
The choice of tool and informant should be made carefully, and the use of multiple
screeners and informants is recommended to improve accuracy and reliability
Progress monitoring tools
In addition to the initial identification of SEMH needs, it is essential to use progress
monitoring tools to assess whether interventions and support strategies are having the
desired impact. These tools help practitioners track changes over time, evaluate
25
effectiveness, and adapt provision in a timely and responsive manner. A wide range of
tools are available, many of which are curated and quality assured by the Child
Outcomes Research Consortium (CORC), including validated measures of mental health,
wellbeing, and functioning. The deliberate selection of such tools should be guided by the
strength of the evidence base, psychometric properties¹, and the practical feasibility
within school settings. Moreover, access to support and training on how to administer,
interpret, and act upon such measures, such as that provided by CORC, is critical to
ensuring data is used meaningfully and ethically in practice.
Dart et al. (2019) reviewed 15 assessment tools used for progress monitoring of
internalising symptoms. Progress monitoring was defined as "an assessment that can
detect small changes in functioning and that is designed for frequent (i.e., at least
weekly) administration to provide information on intervention progress and inform
intervention decisions". Many of the tools reviewed in this paper were originally
developed to monitor more complex needs in clinical settings. However, some
assessments appear potentially suitable for school settings, particularly those that meet
practical criteria set by the researchers such as a short administration time (under 5
minutes) or a brief format of 12 items or fewer.
1. One tool is the Direct Behavior Rating (DBR) is a brief teacher-completed tool
designed to monitor students' emotional and behavioural functioning in real time,
particularly focusing on signs of internalising difficulties such as anxiety, sadness,
and social withdrawal (Chafouleas, 2011). It is typically used with primary and
secondary school-aged students and is well-suited for progress monitoring or
screening purposes within a school setting. Teachers rate specific behaviours
such as how frequently a student appears anxious, withdrawn, or sad based on
direct observations made over a set period, often during a single class or school
day. For example, a teacher rates a student's level of on-task behaviour at the end
of each lesson using a quick scale. The behaviours that are rated are typically in
line with the goals of a given intervention based on the students' individual needs.
Ratings are usually completed using a simple scale (e.g., 0-10) and take only a 1-
2 minutes per student. The specific DBR tool reviewed by Dart et al (2019) was
the Social, Academic, and Emotional Behavioural Risk Screener (SAEBRS; Kilgus
& von der Embse, 2014).
2. Daily Point Sheets (DPS) can also be used by educators to monitor internalising
symptoms. DPS are simple, structured behaviour tracking tools used in school
settings to monitor and reinforce student behaviour throughout the day. They
typically list specific behaviour goals depending on the students' individual needs
1
Psychometric properties refer to the features of an assessment tool that indicates its methodological
quality. These typically include reliability (whether the results of the tool are consistent over time) and
validity (whether the tool measures what it intends to measure). A tools should be both reliable and valid.
26
(e.g., "stays on task," "follows instructions," "uses kind words") and break the
school day into intervals, such as by lesson or period, where students can earn
points or ratings for meeting each goal. These sheets are most commonly used
with primary and secondary school students and can be completed by teachers,
teaching assistants, or support staff in real time and often shared with students
and parents to promote communication and consistency.
3. Brief Behaviour Rating Scales (BBRS) are short, teacher-completed tools used to
monitor specific student behaviours over time. While DBRs might be used daily
and in-real time, BBRS are typically used on a weekly basis to measure broader
behaviours. They are designed to be quick and easy to use, typically taking under
two minutes, and focus on a small number of clearly defined behaviours such as
attention, task completion, social interactions, or emotion regulation. The specific
BBRS reviewed by Dart et al. (2019) was developed and analysed by Gresham et
al. (2010). This version is comprised of 12-items: (1) "Responds appropriately
when hit/pushed," (2) "Follows your directions," (3) "Disturbs ongoing activities,"
(4) "Ignores peer distractions," (5) "Overall classroom behavior," (6) "Is easily
distracted," (7) "Cooperates with peers," (8) "Argues with others," (9) "Gives
compliments to peers," (10) "Joins ongoing activity or group," (11) "Volunteers to
help peers," and (12) "Accepts peer ideas".
4. Finally, Systematic Direct Observation (SDO) can also be used for progress
monitoring of internalising behaviours. SDO is a formal, structured method where
an observer watches and records a student's behaviour in real time, using a pre-
defined coding system (e.g., time sampling or event recording). For example, a
SENCo may code the number of times a child stays on task during a lesson or the
number of peer interactions during a 30-minute time frame.
Although further assessments were identified by Dart et al. (2019), none of the studies in
their review demonstrated the use of these assessments in schools. Thus, further
research is needed to determine whether these assessments could also be appropriate
for use in schools.
Progress monitoring for SEMH needs summary
Many tools curated through the Child Outcomes Research Consortium (CORC)
Direct Behavior Rating
Daily Points Sheets
Brief Behaviour Rating Scales (BBRS)
Systematic direct observation
27
Identification and assessment summary
Our REA identified 15 studies that evaluated identification and assessment methods that
can be used by mainstream educators to identify, screen, or monitor SEMH needs.
Overall, findings indicate that effective identification is preceded by sufficient training and
ongoing professional development to develop a foundational understanding of mental
health and social and emotional needs of children and young people. Such training
should include an understanding of how different social, emotional, or mental health
needs might present differently across ages, genders, and cultural backgrounds and how
they may impact learning. Training should include clear information on any definitions,
signs and symptoms (e.g., internalising and externalising difficulties) relevant to
identification, as well as potential underlying impact factors and evidence-based support.
This can help improve understanding and enable staff to recognise and support students
more effectively.
Many different identification and assessment tools were found to have a reliable evidence
base in our REA. First, direct observation emerged as a valuable tool for both identifying
and monitoring progress in relation to pupil behaviour, including behaviours associated
with internalising difficulties.
Second, a number of screening tools and methods were identified across different
reviews in our REA. Findings from the suggest that although teacher nomination can be
useful, structured screening tools may be more accurate than teacher nomination in
identifying and screening for SEMH needs. The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire
was one of the most frequently reviewed screening tools and was useful in screening for
ADHD, mental health, and as a social-emotional and behavioural screener. There are a
few other screening tools identified in this REA that are effective at measuring
internalising behaviours. This REA highlights that broadband and narrowband
internalising screeners are psychometrically robust for assessing emotional difficulties
but have limited utility in predicting outcomes like academic performance or disciplinary
actions.
Although many screening tools may be effective and freely available to screen for SEMH
needs, these tools should be interpreted with caution by mainstream educators without
specialist qualifications. Even interpretation of the Strengths and Difficulties
Questionnaire results should be treated with caution. While this could be a useful tool for
intervention planning or flagging potential issues, it should not be used for labelling,
identifying specific personality traits or diagnosis. Rather these screeners should be used
to identify critical areas of need that may impact a student's academic performance.
Given that screeners tend to outperform teacher nomination in accurately identifying
behavioural and socioemotional needs, schools may benefit from clearer guidance on
when structured screening tools should supplement or replace reliance on teacher
28
observation. Without such guidance, there is a risk that internalising difficulties, often less
visible to staff, may go undetected, or that behavioural difficulties may be misattributed
leading to delayed or inadequate support. A balanced, evidence-informed approach is
needed to determine when systematic screening is warranted to complement
professional judgement.
A recurring theme is the inconsistent use and validation of screening tools across
different SEMH areas. For instance, many assessments included in the reviews (e.g., the
Childhood Anxiety Sensitivity Index) were not recommended in this current REA due to
lack of standardisation or impracticality for school settings. Emerging research supports a
multi-informant approach and tailored use of instruments depending on whether
behavioural, emotional, or physiological data are being sought. Importantly, this REA
calls for more rigorous research into developing tools suitable for educational settings,
and clarity on the age range in which tools are most appropriate and accurate, as well as
better training for educators and carers in early identification and referral. Despite some
encouraging findings, the overall picture suggests a pressing need for more
standardised, accessible, and psychometrically robust tools, especially for use in early
years settings and educational contexts.
Another limitation of the evidence base is its disproportionate focus on externalising
behaviours, particularly associated with ADHD, within the broader category of SEMH
needs (Blanco-Bayo et al., 2025). This narrow emphasis risks obscuring the complexity
and heterogeneity of SEMH presentations, including internalising difficulties such as
anxiety and withdrawal. As a result, identification practices and interventions may
overlook pupils whose needs are less visible but equally significant, reinforcing existing
inequalities in access to support.
Despite increasing emphasis on early identification of SEMH needs, the role of pupil
voice remains underexplored. A systematic review by Hickinbotham and Soni (2021)
found that most children and young people identified as having SEMH difficulties were
unaware of the label and had little opportunity to contribute to how their needs were
described. The authors argue for greater staff awareness of the implications of both
formal and informal language used around SEMH needs, as such labelling can shape
teacher perceptions and influence the pupil experience. Embedding pupil perspectives
into the identification process could help ensure that assessment is not only systematic
and structured but also participatory and person-centred.
29
Support and intervention
The aim of this section is to review the studies from our REA that evaluated support and
intervention strategies suitable for use by mainstream education professionals to support
children and young people with SEMH needs. Children and young people with SEMH
needs often struggle with learning and academic outcomes across different content areas
(e.g., reading and maths). In fact, children and young people with SEMH needs often
show academic profiles that are comparable to those of peers with general or specific
learning difficulties (Reid et al., 2004; Rivera et al., 2006; Vaughn et al., 2002; Wehby et
al., 2003).
It is important to note here that some of the studies reviewed in this section use language
and diagnostic categories that may now be considered outdated or inconsistent with
current definitions of SEMH (as discussed previously in our Introduction section of this
review). For example, Emotional and Behavioural Difficulties (EBD) is often a term used
across studies, particularly in reviews of US-based studies. The term EBD was previously
used to describe children and young people who experience significant challenges in
managing their emotions and behaviour in ways that affect their learning and social
relationships (Kauffman and Landrum, 2013). In the US, this term may still refer to
children who receive special education services under the category of emotional
disturbance (U.S. Department of Education, 2020). However, the term has largely been
replaced in England by Social, Emotional and Mental Health (SEMH) needs, as defined
in the SEND Code of Practice (DfE/DoH, 2015). We have retained original terms where
necessary for clarity and where specific profiles or needs were not available or not
discussed, but interpret findings through a more contemporary, inclusive lens. Given the
diverse pathways leading to SEMH difficulties, ranging from academic challenges to
biological or contextual factors, the effectiveness of an intervention may depend on how
well it aligns with the specific underlying causes of the SEMH need for a given student.
When reporting on intervention and support strategies in this REA, we refer to effect
sizes reported in the included studies. Effect sizes, typically ranging from 0 to 1, indicate
the magnitude of an intervention's impact, beyond whether the result is statistically
significant. A small effect (around 0.2) suggests modest improvement, a medium effect
(around 0.5) indicates moderate progress, and a large effect (0.8 or above) reflects
substantial impact on learning or behaviour. However, it is important to interpret these
values with caution. In education research, large effect sizes are relatively rare due to the
complexity of influencing factors, including context, implementation fidelity, and individual
variability. Meta-analyses suggest that average effect sizes for educational interventions
typically fall between 0.2 and 0.4 (Lipsey et al., 2012; Kraft, 2020), meaning that even
modest effects may reflect meaningful improvements in practice.
Additionally, the strength and generalisability of findings depend on study design. Single-
case designs offer insight into individual responsiveness and consistency of effects, while
30
group designs such as randomised controlled trials provide population-level
generalisability but may mask important variability. A robust evidence base ideally
triangulates across multiple types of study design.
We also refer to standardised assessments or outcome measures versus researcher-
created or bespoke outcome measures. Standardised assessments are norm-referenced
tools that have been trialled on large, representative samples to establish reliability
(consistency of scores) and validity (that the test really measures what it claims). These
allow for comparison of a student's performance to a representative against a
representative sample of age-matched peers, allowing for an estimate of whether a
student is performing above, at or below expected levels. By contrast, researcher-created
or bespoke measures are tailored to the exact targets of an intervention or teaching
programme for example, a bespoke word-definition task featuring the precise vocabulary
items taught and practised. Although research-created measures tend to be more
sensitive to the incremental progress students make over short instructional periods,
these measures lack the normative data and the extensive psychometric testing of
standardised tools.
High quality teaching and universal support
Children with SEMH needs may experience lower academic achievement compared to
their age-matched peers (Campbell et al., 2018; May et al., 2021; van Poortvliet, 2024).
They may also display challenging behaviours in the classroom, which can disrupt
learning and create difficulties not only for the child, but also for the teacher and their
peers (Abikoff et al. .,2002; Greene et al., 2002). Research suggests that externalising
behaviours, such as aggression, may be more strongly linked to poor academic
performance than internalising behaviours, like anxiety (DiLalla et al., 2004; Nelson et al.,
2004).
Academic difficulties among children and young people with SEMH needs may stem from
underlying challenges with executive functions, including attention, working memory,
planning, and organisation, as well as mental health, social-emotional and behavioural
factors (e.g., Becker & Luthar, 2002; Darney, et al., 2013). These difficulties can affect
their ability to manage tasks, retain information, and engage effectively with learning.
These challenges can also indirectly impact learning by reducing classroom engagement
and disrupting social relationships, both of which are important for academic success.
Based on this, instructional approaches that support executive functioning and
behavioural challenges can be effective for these students (for a review of executive
functions see our Cross-Cutting Themes Report).
Support for students with SEND, including SEMH difficulties can be provided at different
levels, starting with universal strategies delivered to all students through evidence-based
31
'quality first' teaching approaches. Universal provision, or 'tier 1' consists of evidence-
based pedagogical approaches and may be delivered as whole-class teaching, small
groups, or even individual activities. When universal approaches aren't enough to meet
the educational needs of students, targeted ('tier 2') support can be offered, tailored to
individual needs, and implemented either in small groups or through one-to-one
interventions. Finally, if this second 'tier 2' is still not effectively addressing the needs of
students, support can be offered at the third 'tier 3' which consists of specialist support
which may involve external professionals such as Educational Psychologists or
coordinated multi-agency support (e.g., through an Education, Health, and Care Plan).
This so-called tiered approach to support children's educational needs is well established
in the UK educational context (e.g., see SEND Code of Practice, 2015). Similar models
are also used in the US educational context such as response to intervention models
(Fuchs & Fuchs, 2006) or multi-tiered systems of support (McIntosh & Goodman, 2016),
where children who do not progress with effective universal treatment are offered more
individualised and targeted support.
The SEND Code of Practice defines high-quality teaching: high-quality teaching,
differentiated for individual pupils, is the first step in responding to pupils who have or
may have SEND. Additional intervention and support cannot compensate for a lack of
good quality teaching (DfE, 2015, p. 99). By providing high-quality teaching that is
evidence-based and differentiated, schools may reduce the likelihood that students will
require additional, more intensive support. Effective quality-first language teaching relies
on strong classroom management and instruction, supplemented by targeted or
specialist oral-language support when needed (Fuchs & Fuchs, 2006; 2009). A range of
inclusive whole-school policies, instructional strategies and classroom design
approaches can support children and young people with SEMH at this first tier. The
approaches identified in our REA include instructional techniques and adjustments to the
physical or social environment.
Whole-school and whole-class strategies
Whole-school strategies
As noted, behavioural and social-emotional development can influence academic
outcomes, just as academic challenges can, in turn, affect behaviour and emotional
wellbeing. The social context of the classroom, including teacher attitudes and relational
dynamics, plays a key role in shaping academic engagement and social inclusion for
children and young people with SEMH needs (e.g., Carroll & Hurry, 2018; Sherman et al.,
2008; Gwernan-Jones et al., 2015a).
Whole school approaches which support inclusive practice, promote valuing of student
diversity and prioritise staff training create a school climate which improves mental health
32
and wellbeing generally (Wang et al., 2020). Schools that value a positive relationship
between staff, families and young people may offer a protective effect on overall SEMH.
Before narrowing the focus to behavioural approaches, schools should consider the ways
in which they operate to promote flourishing in all pupils. One area of potential impact is
that of behavioural policies, whereby inflexible policies may have a negative impact on
student wellbeing (Izas et al., 2024). Having a good relationship between school and
students improves overall wellbeing (Korpershoek et al., 2020; Yuen & Wu, 2024). There
is growing interest in trauma informed approaches, which seem to offer catalytic validity
in encouraging compassionate approaches to children and young people (Cafaro et al.,
2023). Central to such approaches is the creation of a nurturing and inclusive classroom
climate, underpinned by strong, trusting relationships between teachers and pupils and
among peers. These relational foundations are critical for fostering belonging,
participation, and wellbeing.
Two studies identified in our REA focused on whole-school approaches designed to
promote a positive and inclusive learning environment, while six studies examined
strategies aimed at enhancing pupil motivation and engagement at the classroom level.
Both types of approaches were associated with improvements in academic outcomes,
highlighting the value of supportive relational climates and proactive engagement
practices.
Fabiano et al. (2015) report on three meta-analyses examining the effects of
psychosocial interventions on externalising behaviours and various academic outcomes
for children and young people with ADHD. These interventions included a range of
approaches designed to support educators, parents ,and caregivers in creating
structured, consistent, and emotionally supportive environments. This encompassed
parent training programmes and classroom-or-school-based strategies.
Parent training was considered alongside school-based support to provide a more
comprehensive and coordinated approach. This training typically involves structured
sessions in which caregivers are supported to build positive communication, set clear
and appropriate expectations, respond constructively to challenging behaviour, and
promote emotional regulation and problem-solving skills. Such programmes aim to
strengthen the parent-child relationship and equip parents with practical strategies for
supporting their child's development.
The review also included contingency management approaches (e.g., using positive
reinforcement such as praise or rewards, or response cost systems like loss of
privileges).
Fabiano et al. (2015) found that parent training interventions yielded moderate to large
effect sizes, particularly in improving parenting practices and reducing disruptive
behaviours in children. However, findings related to contingency management strategies
33
were mixed, with some studies reporting large effects and others showing no significant
impact. These inconsistencies may reflect variation in methodology or implementation,
indicating that the evidence for such approaches remains inconclusive.
Other studies found in our REA have indicated that token economies and Check-
in/Check-Out systems can also be effective in motivating and teaching self-regulation
and goal-setting skills to children and young people with SEMH needs (Therrien et al.,
2014). With these approaches, it is important to maintain strong coordination among all
educational staff to ensure these approaches are implemented consistently and
effectively. Leadership from senior staff plays a critical role in guiding, supporting, and
aligning the implementation process across the school.
1. A token economy is a behaviour management system in which students earn
tokens for displaying desired behaviours. These tokens can later be exchanged for
rewards or privileges. These whole school approaches are useful in setting
expectations, providing immediate feedback, and encouraging motivation through
rewards.
2. The Check-In/Check-Out (CICO) system is a structured school-based intervention
designed to support students who are experiencing mild to moderate behavioural
or social-emotional difficulties. It provides a consistent daily routine that helps
students start the day positively, stay on track during lessons, and reflect on their
progress. Each day begins with a morning check-in, where the student meets with
a designated adult, such as a teaching assistant or mentor, to review behaviour
goals and receive a daily point sheet. Throughout the day, teachers rate the
student's behaviour at regular intervals based on specific, agreed-upon targets,
such as staying on task or following instructions. At the end of the day, the student
checks out with the same adult to review their progress, reflect on successes or
challenges, and receive encouragement or rewards based on their performance.
The point sheet is often sent home to keep parents informed and engaged. CICO
is particularly effective for students who respond well to adult attention and
positive reinforcement, as it increases structure, provides immediate feedback,
and builds supportive relationships.
It is important to acknowledge that behaviour-focused strategies, when applied without a
thorough understanding of a child's underlying needs and experiences, can be
problematic. If goals are misaligned with a pupil's developmental stage or capacity, such
approaches risk being experienced as punitive or unattainable. This can undermine
wellbeing, reinforce disengagement, and erode trust in school relationships. A needs-
informed and relational approach is therefore essential to ensure support is both
meaningful and constructive.
34
Whole-school support strategies summary
Complementary parental training programmes
Token economies or rewards systems
Check-in/check-out system
Whole-class strategies
At the classroom level, strategies aimed at increasing academic motivation based on
reinforcement have also been shown to benefit children and young people with SEMH
needs, especially those exhibiting behavioural challenges. Two systematic reviews in our
REA found that positive reinforcement through praise, both from teachers and peers
were effective in reducing challenging behaviour and improving academic motivation, on-
task behaviour and attending behaviour (e.g., the verbal and non-verbal actions that a
listener takes to show they are actively engaged and interested in what a speaker is
saying) (Markelz & Taylor, 2016; McKenna et al., 2021). Praising strategies were most
effective when they were behaviour-specific (e.g., "I really liked how you raised your hand
and waited your turn to speak"). Although praise was effective for children across
different age groups, praise might be most effective for younger children compared to
older children. It is also important to understand the student's preference for public
versus private praise as this can impact the efficacy of the praise.
Additionally, there is growing evidence that instructional choice can increase motivation
for students, especially those who may demonstrate externalising behaviours, and
particularly when children and young people have clear preferences, enjoy choosing, and
benefit from the outcomes. Instructional choice is a teaching strategy that involves giving
students options in how they engage with learning tasks. Here they may be given
different options such as choosing between different tasks, materials, or formats. This
approach gives students a sense of autonomy and can also enhance motivation and
increase their engagement with learning. In a systematic review, Royer et al. (2017)
found that instructional choice for children aged 5 to 18 helped reduce problem
behaviour, increased reading fluency, sped up task completion, and boosted classroom
engagement. Instructional choice can also improve maths and science engagement and
performance (Garwood et al., 2014; Tan, 2016; Therrien et al., 2014).
Providing more opportunities for children and young people to actively engage in hands-
on activities, whole-class or group-based discussions has also been shown to be
effective in improving academic outcomes for children and young people with SEMH
needs. For example, offering more opportunities to respond during instruction may
decrease disruptions and increase the proportion of correct responses for children with
SEMH needs (i.e., diagnosed with EBD) (Tan, 2016). Incorporating group discussions
and hands-on activities has also been found to be effective in improving science
35
knowledge of children and young people with SEMH needs (Therrien et al. 2014).
However, these papers did not directly specify the individual profiles of children and
young people who may benefit most from these interventions.
A final classroom-level technique that has been found to be effective is progressive
muscle relaxation. In a systematic review, McKenna et al. (2021) found that progressive
muscle relaxation was effective in reducing aggression in young children with SEMH
needs when delivered consistently by trained teachers. While effects weren't fully
maintained at follow-up, the intervention reduced behavioural incidents below pre-
intervention levels. This suggests that explicit relaxation or emotional regulation training
may be a useful classroom-based strategy when delivered regularly. However, the
McKenna et al. (2021) review did not detail the type of training that is needed to deliver
this intervention and did not detail the specific dosage that may be required.
Another report that was not identified in our REA as it was published after the date of our
search, but mainstream educators may find useful is the Education for Wellbeing:
Effectiveness of school mental health and wellbeing promotion. This was a large-scale
(32,655 participants) research programme using randomised controlled trials to
investigate effective interventions for promoting pupil mental health and wellbeing in
primary and secondary schools. This study found evidence for three interventions that
may show promise in schools in raising mental health and wellbeing outcomes including
the Strategies for Safety and Wellbeing in primary and secondary schools, Relaxation
techniques (for primary schools only) and Mindfulness-based exercises (for secondary
schools only). The Guide and YAM (both in secondary schools) are not recommended
due to lack of a clear impact on key outcomes, and because there were indications that
they may cause harm to some groups of pupils. The evidence also demonstrates the
importance of high-quality implementation of interventions, choosing interventions with
evidence of effectiveness and appropriate for the phase of education and embedding
programmes within a wider, holistic approach to mental health and wellbeing promotion
and support monitoring the implementation of programmes.
Classroom-level support strategies summary
Use of praise
Offering instructional choice
Providing additional opportunities to engage in discussions
Providing hands-on activities
Relaxation techniques
36
Instructional strategies
Academic difficulties among children and young people with SEMH may stem from
underlying challenges with motivation, engagement, social relationships, and executive
functions, including attention, working memory, planning, and organisation (executive
function is covered in more detail within our Cross-Cutting Themes Report). Instructional
approaches refer to the methods, strategies, and techniques that educators use to
facilitate learning and help students achieve specific learning goals which often address
these underlying needs. These practices include how teachers deliver content, organise
learning activities, provide feedback, and adapt instruction to meet diverse student
needs.
A range of instructional strategies were investigated across the studies in our REA aimed
at improving various academic outcomes for students with SEMH needs. Many of these
approaches share common principles: they minimise cognitive load, provide structure,
break tasks into manageable steps, use clear prompts/cues, explicit instruction, use
motivation techniques, and encourage positive relationships. Five studies in our REA
reported on instructional techniques for children and young people with SEMH needs.
Two systematic reviews of single-case study designs (Ralston et al., 2014; Tan, 2016)
found different prompting techniques such as constant time delay or discrete cuing when
students are off-task can be effective in keeping children and young people (aged 6 to
18) with SEMH needs (i.e., students recorded with- or at-risk for EBD) on task and with
completing their work.
1. Constant Time Delay is a systematic instructional strategy used to teach new
skills. It involves presenting a prompt after a fixed delay, allowing learners the
opportunity to respond independently before receiving assistance, thereby
promoting independence and reducing prompt dependency (Wolery et al., 1992).
Constant Time Delay can be effectively implemented through teacher-delivered
(flashcards, direct instruction) and technology-based (computer-assisted,
PowerPoint, SMART boards) methods. Although several different studies were
included in each of these reviews, findings are based on only a small number of
children. Larger scale studies using group-designs are needed to determine
whether findings can be generalised to a wider population of children and young
people with SEMH needs.
2. Discrete cuing refers to a teaching or behaviour support strategy in which a clear,
specific, and often individualised prompt is given to signal when a student should
perform a particular behaviour or task. This cuing is often done discretely or
privately to minimise embarrassment or classroom disruption. The cue should be
unambiguous and given directly prior to when the desired behaviour is expected.
37
Additionally, findings from both group-based and single-case studies, reported in two
systematic reviews (McKenna et al., 2021a; Tan, 2016), find that schema-based
instruction for problem-solving is effective in improving maths skills in children and young
people with SEMH needs (i.e., students recorded with- or at-risk for EBD). Its impact is
particularly strong when combined with strategies such as teacher modelling, guided
practice, corrective feedback, and motivational supports like token systems.
1. Schema-based instruction for problem-solving is a teaching approach that helps
students solve word problems in maths by teaching them to recognise underlying
problem types (schemas) and apply consistent strategies or templates to solve
them. This strategy can be beneficial especially for children who may struggle with
understanding the language and complexity of word problems as it helps to build
conceptual understanding and consistency in problem-solving.
Task sequencing can also be a useful tool in addressing challenging behaviour and poor
academic performance in children and young people with SEMH needs. Knowles et al.
(2015) investigated the use of task sequencing as an academic intervention for students
with SEMH needs. Their review identified 11 studies investigating different types of task
sequencing including high-probability sequencing, and task interspersal procedures. All
studies reported improved task compliance (i.e., the time it took to begin a task or comply
with a request), activity transitions, and academic output (i.e., the amount of academic
work completed: math problems, words read, words written). Task sequencing was found
to be effective across a variety of participants who varied by age. It may also be
important to incorporate praise and tokens into this strategy for better outcomes.
Task-sequencing refers to the deliberate ordering of learning tasks or activities in a way
that supports student understanding and success. Task sequencing helps reduce
cognitive overload, supports confidence and motivation, and allows students to build
skills progressively. Task-sequencing can be facilitated by classroom teachers or
specialist teachers. Different types of task sequencing explored in our REA were high-
probability sequencing and task interspersal.
1. A high-probability sequencing which involves giving a child a short series of tasks
that they are very likely to comply with (high-probability or "high-p" tasks), followed
immediately by a task that they are less likely to comply with (low-probability or
"low-p" task). Most of the studies evaluating high-probability sequencing in
Knowles et al.'s (2015) review presented the high-probability task before the low-
probability task and had on average, a ratio of three high-p requests followed by
one low-p request for at least one condition of the intervention.
2. Task interspersal refers to interspersing easy and difficult tasks (e.g., difficult tasks
interspersed with easy tasks relative to the presentation of difficult tasks in
isolation). Task interspersal was also found to be effective in maths (Tan, 2016).
38
Instructional strategies, particularly in maths and science, that rely heavily on rote
memorisation (learning through repetition and memorisation) or textbook-based, lecture-
style teaching without opportunities for students to make connections or engage in critical
thinking can be particularly challenging for learners with SEMH. These students may
struggle with content knowledge and may find it difficult to link new information to prior
learning in meaningful ways (Scruggs & Mastropieri, 2000a). While two reviews in our
REA found that various memorisation and recall strategies, such as fixed-delay
prompting, and cover, copy, and compare (CCC) procedures, can improve recall of
multiplication and division facts (i.e., Ralston et al., 2014; Tan, 2016), more conceptually
focused approaches may be particularly effective for children and young people with
SEMH, as they support the development of deeper thinking and understanding.
1. The cover, copy, and compare (CCC) procedure involves the following structure:
(1) students look at the maths problem and the answer, (2) students cover the
problem and answer, (3) students write the problem and answer, and (4) students
uncover the problem and answer and check it with what they wrote. The teacher
may provide corrective feedback if necessary.
Another three systematic reviews (Ralston et al., 2014; Tan, 2016; Therrien et al., 2014)
highlight the effectiveness of conceptually focused strategies that emphasise problem-
solving, reasoning, communication, and making conceptual connections in maths and
science instruction. These strategies can be largely implemented at the whole-class level
or as part of targeted and individualised interventions.
First, these findings suggest inquiry-based techniques that involved either explicit
instruction or direct instruction are effective in both maths and science instruction for
children with SEMH needs. Techniques like direct or explicit instruction, teacher
modelling, guided practice, and graphic organisers provide clear, step-by-step guidance
that helps reduce cognitive load. Inquiry-based learning also encourages hands-on
exploration and student participation, which helps maintain attention and motivation.
Therrien et al. (2014) found that direct instruction with other instructional components
such as graphic organisers, teacher modelling, hands-on activities, and group discussion
were more effective than traditional textbook-based instructions in improving science
knowledge and outcomes on performance-based and applied assessments in four
studies.
Tan (2016) found that effective approaches to teaching word problems included explicit
instruction supported by initial scaffolding, which was gradually reduced to encourage
student independence. Effective strategies also involved the use of questioning
techniques to develop critical thinking skills.
39
Finally, Ralston et al. (2014) found that effective teacher instructional strategies for
improving maths outcomes included adjusting the task difficulty, constant time delay, and
direct instruction.
1. Direct Instruction (DI), developed by Engelmann and colleagues (2002), refers to a
structured teaching method, where instruction is delivered explicitly and concisely
where teachers strategically sequence the lesson, and script everything included
in a lesson. The teacher begins by presenting, demonstrating, and/or modelling
specific skills, concepts, and behaviours then they supervise students while they
practice the ideas or skills presented and provide continuous feedback and
encouragement. This approach is often paired with visual materials such as
graphic organisers and includes hands-on activities.
2. Explicit teaching on the other hand is a broader pedagogical approach where
learning goals and strategies are made visible to students. It includes clear
modelling, guided practice, and independent application, but it is not necessarily
scripted (Archer & Hughes, 2011).
Additionally, mnemonics was found to be an effective modification of memorisation
strategies in teaching science-based vocabulary and maths problems across all three of
these systematic reviews. In the studies reviewed by Therrien et al. (2014), keyword
mnemonic strategies were compared to traditional vocabulary memorisation with
flashcards. Students who studied vocabulary using keyword mnemonics performed better
on daily and cumulative vocabulary tests.
1. Keyword mnemonics are strategies where keyword and illustration combinations
are taught and in turn used by students as a prompt to remember the definition of
the targeted vocabulary word (Atkinson, 1975).
Lastly, multiple studies in our review found benefits in academic outcomes for children
and young people with SEMH (reported as EBD in the original study) using peer-
mediated strategies. Bowman-Perrott et al. (2023) and Dunn et al. (2017) found that
class-wide peer tutoring and reciprocal peer tutoring (where students take turns being the
tutor and learner) resulted in improved social (e.g., peer interactions, active responding,
and cooperative behaviours) and academic (e.g., reading, spelling, maths) outcomes for
children and young people with SEMH of all ages.
Therrien et al. (2014) also found that peer-mediated techniques were effective in
improving engagement and science achievement in two studies. One technique in their
review involved students taking turns as tutor and tutee during 30-minute sessions over
four weeks, focusing on vocabulary and comprehension. A behaviour monitoring system
was also in place in the form of a classroom token economy. One out of two classrooms
showed a slight improvement in science scores, but both saw increased on-task
40
behaviour. Another study in their review compared traditional lecture-based instruction
with a peer-assisted approach where differentiated, partner-based activities replaced
worksheet time. Over a 12-week period, the peer-assisted group outperformed the
traditional group on science content exams and state high-stakes assessments (e.g.,
GCSEs).
Instructional support strategies summary
Prompting
Schema-based instruction
Modelling
Task sequencing
Daily report cards
Direct instruction
Explicit instruction
Scaffolding
Mnemonics
Cover, copy, compare
Peer-mediated strategies
Targeted intervention and support
Pupils who do not make expected progress despite high-quality teaching and universal
support should receive timely, evidence-informed targeted support, with their
development regularly reviewed, and such interventions must adhere to principles shown
to be effective (Law et al., 2012a). In this section we review several findings that address
targeted support techniques for children and young people with SEMH needs. Although
many of these approaches will be targeted to the individual needs of the students, many
can also be implemented in wider classroom settings. Interventions may sometimes
require mental health professionals with specialist training, such as clinical psychologists,
counsellors, or psychiatrists. In these cases, we highlight when interventions have been
carried out by mental health professionals.
Classroom behaviour and general attainment
Moore et al. (2018) reviewed 28 randomised controlled trials evaluating 8 different types
of intervention approaches for children and young people (aged 4 to 18) with ADHD to
improve either academic outcomes, externalising behaviours, or classroom engagement
41
and participation. Combined intervention approaches (i.e., interventions with multiple
different main components) and daily report cards showed the most promise, with small
to large positive effects on academic and behavioural outcomes, such as reading, writing,
homework completion, and classroom behaviour, particularly when parents were involved
in delivering rewards. Other approaches, including cognitive training, relaxation
techniques, task modification, self-monitoring, and study skills (delivered in isolation), had
limited or inconsistent evidence of effectiveness. However, most studies in this review
were of low quality, and few tested whether improvements lasted over time or worked for
secondary-aged students. Thus, these findings don't necessarily indicate that these
approaches don't work, but that more high-quality evidence is needed to determine their
effectiveness.
1. Combined interventions refer to approaches that include multiple components,
often incorporating study and organisational skills training alongside other
strategies such as social skills development, behaviour modification techniques,
parent involvement, self-monitoring, and the use of daily report cards. Half of the
combined interventions were versions of the Challenging Horizons Programme.
The Challenging Horizons Program is a school-based intervention designed to
support adolescents with ADHD and related executive function difficulties. It
focuses on improving academic performance, organisation, time management,
social skills, and emotional regulation. Results demonstrated small but positive
effects of these types of interventions on various academic outcomes such as
reading, writing, improved marks. Large effects were also seen for combined
ADHD symptoms (i.e., inattention and hyperactivity), though findings for
inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity are less certain as the evidence was
mixed.
2. When delivered in isolation, some specific study and organisational skills training
such as the Homework, Organisation, and Planning Skills (HOPS; Langberg et al.,
2011; 2012) intervention may demonstrate improvements in parent-rated
homework problems and organisational skills and teacher-rated materials
management. However, other studies with general planning and organisation
management training demonstrated little evidence of effectiveness when delivered
in isolation, suggesting that they should not be the sole focus of an intervention.
However, it is unclear what these strategies should be combined with to be
effective. Additionally, HOPS was delivered by a school-based mental health
practitioner. Therefore, further research is needed to determine whether this
intervention can be delivered by teachers.
3. Daily report card interventions are tools used in schools to monitor and reinforce
target behaviours or academic goals throughout the day. Teachers rate the child's
performance on specific goals (e.g., staying on task, completing work), and the
42
report is sent home daily, often linked to rewards provided by parents or
caregivers. Moore et al.'s (2018) review showed medium to large beneficial effects
across behavioural and academic outcomes, particularly when parents were
involved in delivering rewards based on the daily report card. However, the limited
number of studies, wide confidence intervals, and high heterogeneity in findings
highlight the need for more robust evidence to confirm their effectiveness and
generalisability.
Overall, based on Moore at al.'s (2018) findings, mainstream educators may find value in
implementing structured, multi-component interventions (like the Challenging Horizons
Programme) and using daily report cards, especially when coordinated with parents.
However, isolated strategies like study skills training or cognitive tasks should not be
relied on alone. Given some interventions such as Homework, Organisation, and
Planning Skills (HOPS; Langberg et al., 2011; 2012) were delivered by trained
specialists, more research is needed to assess which approaches are feasible and
effective when led by teachers, especially in secondary settings.
Targeted approaches for classroom behaviour and general attainment summary
Multi-component interventions including study and organisation skills with social or
behavioural support such as self-monitoring or social skills training
Daily report cards
Exam support for children and young people with ADHD
Students with SEMH needs may be eligible to receive exam access arrangements (JCQ,
2024). Common exam access arrangements for students with different types of SEND
are 25%-50% extra time to complete an exam, a reader (human or pen reader), prompts,
or small-group/individual invigilation. Although the assessment and application process
for access arrangements is typically managed by the SENCo or an access arrangements
coordinator, teachers play a crucial role in identifying students who may require support
and in implementing access arrangements as part of everyday classroom practice (e.g.,
Antalek et al., 2025). Thus, it can be useful to understand which access arrangements
work for different types of needs, and how they might be best implemented. One
systematic review (Lovett & Nelson, 2021) examined the available evidence on the
effectiveness of commonly used accommodations for children and young people with
ADHD.
Overall, findings demonstrate that there is not one single universal accommodation that
works for all children and young people with ADHD, and an accommodation does not
guarantee a better exam outcome. In their review, Lovett and Nelson (2021) found that
extra time accommodations may have weak evidence of effectiveness, because it does
not consistently improve performance for students with ADHD more than for their peers
43
without ADHD. However, having a human reader for the test or exam questions has
shown evidence of effectiveness for children and young people with ADHD. This
accommodation may be beneficial due to reading challenges commonly associated with
ADHD needs and the implicit redirection provided through reading exam questions.
Although it has been theorised that completing exams in smaller groups or one-to-one
may decrease distractions (e.g., Lovett & Lewandowski, 2015), evidence from Lovett and
Nelson's (2021) systematic review demonstrate that this accommodation may not
necessarily improve testing performance. However, the authors cite that evidence on the
efficacy on access arrangements for children with ADHD is still lacking and more large
scale studies need to be conducted, especially with more common arrangements such as
prompts or extra time.
In terms of improving the effectiveness of access arrangements, Lovett and Nelson
(2021) also reviewed six documents focused on improving current practices for
supporting students with ADHD. This resulted in a few key important findings. First, in-
service training can increase teachers' willingness and reported use of accommodations,
though effectiveness of the accommodation was not evaluated. Second, functional
assessment offers a promising method for tailoring accommodations to individual needs.
Finally, training secondary school students with ADHD in self-advocacy can enhance
their ability to request appropriate support.
Targeted exam support for children and young people with ADHD summary
Exam access arrangement as human readers
Teacher training on exam access arrangements
Training on using access arrangements for children and young people
Self-regulation and organisation skills
Many children with different types of SEND, including those with SEMH needs, often
experience difficulties with self-regulation, self-monitoring, and organisational skills.
These challenges are associated with poorer academic outcomes, while improvements in
these areas have been linked to better educational performance (e.g., Barkley, 2011;
Forbes & Dahl 2005; Woodword et al., 2017). Self-regulation strategies are effective
because they provide the structured, scaffolded approaches needed to support attention
and executive function difficulties as well as motivation to promote independence. For
example, one systematic review of single-case studies (Alsalamah, 2017) found that
children with ADHD who were taught various self-monitoring strategies such as using
cards or checklists demonstrated improvements in classroom engagement,
preparedness, and on-task behaviour. The use of reinforcements (e.g., stickers, or
favourite activities) often further improved this behaviour.
44
A second systematic review of single-case study designs found that self-regulation
interventions (e.g., self-monitoring strategies, strategy instruction, and self-regulated
strategy development) had a moderate positive impact on different academic outcomes
for children and young people with EBD² aged 5 to 18 (Popham et al., 2018). The
strongest gains were seen in reading, followed by writing and maths, as well as evidence
that these benefits were maintained over time and transferred across tasks. Although
some of these interventions were delivered by researchers, the following interventions
were also delivered by teachers in classroom settings making them feasible for use in
mainstream settings.
1. Self-monitoring interventions, which included strategies such as self-assessment
and self-recording, monitoring attention and performance, and the WATCH
strategy. WATCH is an acronym that stands for the steps in the procedure: W -
Write down an assignment when it is given and write the due date; A - Ask for
clarification or help on the assignment if needed; T - Task-analyse the assignment
and schedule the tasks over the days available to complete the assignment; and
CH- Check all work for completeness, accuracy, and neatness. These approaches
encouraged pupils to observe and evaluate their own behaviours or work, often
improving task focus, homework completion, and academic performance through
increased awareness and accountability.
2. Strategy instruction approaches involve teaching pupils specific, step-by-step
techniques to support learning. Examples include self-talk and self-verbalisation
(to guide thinking during tasks), Touch Math (to support numeracy), and Cover,
Copy, and Compare (to improve accuracy and fluency in basic skills).
3. Self-Regulated Strategy Development (SRSD) programmes were the most
comprehensive, combining explicit strategy instruction with self-regulation
techniques. These strategies break writing tasks into manageable, explicit steps,
reducing cognitive load and helping students maintain focus. Common frameworks
included POW (Pick my idea, Organise my notes, Write and say more) with TREE
(Topic sentence, Reasons (3 or more), Explain each reason, Ending) for
persuasive writing, POW with WWW (Who, When, Where) for narrative writing,
and TWA (Think before reading, Think while reading, Think after reading) with
PLANS (Pick goals, List ways to meet goals, And make notes, Number your ideas,
Sequence your ideas) for reading comprehension. Other variants like STOP
(Suspend judgment, take a side, Organise ideas, Plan more as you write) with
DARE (Develop your topic sentence, Add supporting ideas, Reject the other side,
End with a conclusion) and with AIMS (Audience, Intent, Message, Style) provided
2 While the original study refers to Emotional and Behavioural Difficulties (EBD), this term is no longer
officially recognised within the English education system. Current terminology has shifted towards "Social,
Emotional and Mental Health" (SEMH) needs, reflecting a more holistic and nuanced understanding of
children's wellbeing and support requirements.
45
structured supports for planning, drafting, and revising written work. These
programmes were often adapted to include motivational supports such as
rewards, reinforcing both skill use and self-regulatory behaviours.
Self-monitoring and self-regulation strategies may also improve outcomes in maths and
numeracy. Self-management of attention and self-management of performance on
mathematics calculations were found to be effective for children with SEMH needs
(reported as EBD in the original study) in improving on-task behaviour and completion of
maths problems in one systematic review (Tan, 2016). Different approaches involved
asking students to indicate whether or not they were on-task at different time intervals
(e.g., with the sound of a bell), or counting the number of maths problems completed.
Self-instruction, and multi-component approaches that combined elements from different
methods have also been effective in improving maths outcomes especially when
teachers provided explicit instruction to ensure students mastered the strategies before
applying them independently (Ralston et al., 2014).
In addition to self-regulation and self-monitoring, children with ADHD often have
challenges with organisation. Poor organisation skills may affect children's ability to plan,
prioritise, and organise academic tasks and as task demands increase, organisation
skills may suffer further. Challenges with these skills may result from underlying
difficulties with executive functioning. Organisational skills training was found to be an
effective strategy to improve attention and academic performance in children and young
people with ADHD across different age groups (aged 5 to 18) (Bikic et al., 2017). These
organisational skills included organisation of materials (e.g., school materials that need to
be brought back home), time (e.g., planning and scheduling of assignments due by the
end of the week), and tasks (e.g., items needed for today's homework project). However,
in the review by Bikic et al. (2017), all interventions were delivered by specialists, such as
counsellors or therapists, through family therapy sessions or structured afterschool
programmes. As such, these interventions are likely best suited for specialist 'tier 3'
provision, where intensive, individualised support is required.
Mindfulness training has been shown to improve mental health outcomes, such as stress,
depression, and anxiety in children and young people (Kallapiran et al., 2015). While it
may also help with attention and on-task behaviour, the evidence for these effects is
weaker. Another rapid evidence assessment (Carroll et al., 2017) found that mindfulness
training may lead to small benefits for attention and on-task behaviour but there was no
evidence of impact on academic performance or behaviour. Additionally, the number of
sessions needed varied. However, caution should be taken when using this tool as
studies have found that mindfulness training can sometimes lead to worse outcomes in
hyperactivity/inattention and emotional problems (e.g., Kuyken et al., 2022). For example,
it is possible that mindfulness could lead children and young people to be more aware of
their negative thoughts and feelings. However, the specific factors that may impact this
46
are not currently well-known. More research is needed to determine whether mindfulness
could be a scalable tool to improve academic related outcomes.
Targeted self-regulation and organisational interventions summary
Self-monitoring strategies
Setting and monitoring goals
Self-Regulated Strategy Development (SRSD) programmes
Organisation skills training
Mindfulness techniques should be used with caution
Reading interventions
Students with SEMH needs often experience poor reading outcomes compared to their
peers and may be poor responders when participating in reading interventions (e.g.,
Boon et al., 2020; Garwood et al., 2014; Jacobson et al., 2013; Lane, 2007). It has also
been suggested that students with SEMH needs may experience poorer quality reading
instruction due to the use of independent seatwork (e.g., tasks to be completed in the
absence of teacher and/or peer support) and the loss of instructional time in those
studies that included students with SEMH as study participants (e.g., Vaughn et al.,
2002). Here we investigate the evidence-base for literacy interventions for students with
SEMH needs as well as consider studies that have incorporated behavioural supports in
addition to reading instruction. This synthesis of ten studies from our REA highlights
several key findings on effective reading interventions for children and young people with
SEMH.
Reading instruction approaches
McKenna et al. (2021b) reviewed studies that investigated reading instruction techniques
for children and young people with SEMH (reported as EBD in the original study) and
reading difficulties. Findings suggest that teachers supporting students with EBD in
reading require enabling conditions to be effective (Bettini et al., 2020). This includes
access to professional development in evidence-based reading instruction, time for
collaboration with literacy and behaviour specialists, and structured support systems.
These conditions can increase the use of effective methods such as explicit code-based
instruction, vocabulary teaching, differentiated instruction, and peer-mediated
approaches, thereby improving student engagement. Second, the use of independent
silent reading should be carefully evaluated for this group. Overreliance on this strategy
may reduce opportunities for explicit, teacher-led instruction and may inadvertently
reinforce avoidance behaviours, particularly if used in response to challenging behaviour.
More effective approaches involve differentiated, structured reading instruction tailored to
47
the learner's current level, integrated with skill-building in connected texts, and supported
by positive behaviour strategies.
Direct Instruction in reading was also found to be an effective strategy in supporting a
range of reading outcomes (e.g., reading fluency and phonological skills) for children and
young people with EBD³ (Burke et al., 2015; 2023; Chitiyo et al., 2023; Garwood et al.,
2014) and with ADHD (Stewart & Austin, 2019). Studies in the reviews used the
'Corrective Reading Thinking Basics: Comprehension Level A' program, which included
scripted lessons, choral responses, teacher signals, corrective feedback, explicit
modelling, guided practice, and independent work. The intervention showed strong
effects.
Reading and behavioural interventions
Roberts et al. (2020) investigated group design reading or behaviour interventions for
Kindergarten-grade 12 students (age 5 to 18) with co-occurring reading difficulties and
behaviour difficulties (e.g., externalising behaviours, internalising behaviours, ADHD).
They found that small-group reading interventions for students aged 5 to 16 with
significant reading difficulties and SEMH needs or ADHD had a large positive effect on
reading outcomes. Specifically, for younger students (aged 5 to 11), the reading
interventions targeted alphabetic principles, phonological awareness, or phonics. Only
one study investigated reading interventions in older learners (age 12 to 16) and focused
on reading comprehension.
The specific programmes evaluated in the review were as follows:
1. The Phonological Awareness Training for Reading (PATR; Torgesen & Bryant,
1994a) is a supplemental early reading curriculum designed to promote
awareness of words' sound structure by helping students learn how spoken
language is represented by letters. There are four different activities involved in
PATR: (a) rhyming,(b) blending, (c) segmenting, and (d) reading and spelling.
2. Stepping Stones to Literacy is an early literacy intervention designed to improve
foundational skills in phonemic awareness, vocabulary, and early decoding,
typically targeting children at risk for reading difficulties in kindergarten or early
Year 1. It consists of structured, short daily lessons (usually around 25 minutes)
delivered over several weeks, often in small groups, and includes activities such
as sound sorting, rhyming, and initial sound matching, aiming to build pre-reading
skills essential for later literacy development (Schuele et al., 2008). In the studies
included in Robert et al.'s (2020) review, the lessons were delivered in a one-to-
3 While the original study refers to Emotional and Behavioural Difficulties (EBD), this term is no longer
officially recognised within the English education system. Current terminology has shifted towards "Social,
Emotional and Mental Health" (SEMH) needs, reflecting a more holistic and nuanced understanding of
children's wellbeing and support requirements.
48
one format by trained paraprofessional-level tutors (project staff) during the school
day. The tutor training included information on theory and rationale. Instructional
activities were modelled to the tutors and tutors then had opportunities to practice
with corrective feedback. Then tutors were observed delivering three complete
lessons selected randomly. The tutors were required to implement at least 90% of
the Stepping Stones lesson components (i.e., n = 15) as prescribed prior to
tutoring children. Finally, after training had completed, tutors were observed and
provided with corrective feedback, if necessary, while tutoring children during the
first five lessons.
3. The Phonological Analysis and Blending (PHAB) and the Word Identification and
Strategy Training (WIST) were developed and validated by Lovett and colleagues
for use with children with reading difficulties (Lovett et al., 1994; Lovett, et al.,
2000). Both programmes provide intensive instruction in word decoding and text
reading. PHAB, delivered using a Direct Instruction approach, incorporates
lessons from the Reading Mastery I/II Fast Cycle and Corrective Reading
programmes (Engelmann & Bruner, 1988; Engelmann, Carnine, & Johnson, 1988;
Engelmann, Johnson, et al., 1988), focusing on phonological analysis,
phonological blending, and letter-sound associations within the context of word
recognition and decoding. In contrast, WIST teaches children to apply and monitor
four metacognitive decoding strategies: identifying words by analogy, recognising
familiar word parts, using flexible vowel pronunciations, and removing prefixes and
suffixes. These strategies are based on the Benchmark School Word
Identification/Vocabulary Development Program (Gaskins, Downer, & Gaskins,
1986).
4. Reading Mastery I is a Direct Instruction program which provides students with
daily structured phonics instruction. This programme is aimed kindergarten to
early Year 1 (ages 5-7) and can also be effective for children without SEND
(Adams & Engelmann, 1996). Reading Mastery I is composed of several key
features (e.g., signals, repetition) used to teach the basic reading skills (i.e.,
sounds; pronunciation; sequencing; blends; sounding out skills; regular, rhyming,
and irregular words) (Engelmann & Bruner, 1988). Like other Direct Instruction
programmes, Reading Mastery I includes daily scripted lessons beginning with
basic decoding and reading comprehension skills and works towards reading
fluency. Reading Mastery I is also sequenced to avoid confusion between letters
(e.g., b, d) and is designed to build upon the prior day's material with similar
sounds, words, and activities.
5. The Great Leaps program (Mercer & Campbell, 1998) is a phonics programme
composed of three parts (i.e., phonics, sight phrases, oral reading selections)
designed to increase reading fluency and comprehension for beginning readers
49
and students at risk for developing reading difficulties. Only the phonics section,
including sound awareness and letter recognition probes, were used in Roberts et
al. (2021) review as a supplement to Reading Mastery I. Researchers were trained
and supervised to implement the Reading Mastery I and Great Leaps curricula.
Their training included a two-day workshop covering instructional techniques such
as signalling, pacing, error correction, and daily lesson delivery. They were shown
program models by trainers experienced in using the programmes, practised
implementation, and received feedback during follow-up sessions. Once the study
began, biweekly observations were conducted over seven months by a trained
researcher, using a Direct Instruction Observation Form to monitor key teaching
elements and provide ongoing written and verbal feedback.
6. The Sound Partners programmes (Vadasy & Sanders, 2007; Vadasy et al., 2005)
are early reading interventions designed for use with beginning readers who are at
risk of reading difficulties. These programs focus on phonics-based instruction
including phonemic awareness, letter-sound correspondence, decoding, and
fluency and are typically delivered in one-to-one settings.
Interestingly, interventions in Roberts et al.'s (2020) review without a behaviour support
component were associated with better reading outcomes than those that combined
reading and behaviour support. In other words, there was no evidence of collateral
impacts (i.e., reading interventions improving behaviour and behaviour interventions
improving reading). The authors highlight the need for more intervention research to fully
understand how reading and behaviour difficulties interact and how best to design
effective programs for these students.
Behaviour interventions, particularly self-monitoring and function-based approaches have
also showed positive effects on student engagement and reductions in disruptive
behaviour, but no studies examined their impact on reading outcomes. Function-based
interventions are behaviour support strategies designed to address the specific reason
(function) why a student is engaging in a challenging or disruptive behaviour. Instead of
applying a generic consequence or rule, function-based interventions first identify the
purpose that the behaviour serves for the student, such as getting attention, escaping a
task, accessing something tangible, or gaining sensory stimulation, and then design
supports that meet the student's needs in a more appropriate way.
Roberts et al. (2023) conducted a further systematic review which investigated
behavioural interventions and reading interventions in children and young people
specifically with inattentive ADHD and co-occurring reading difficulties (Roberts et al.,
2023). This synthesis of 14 single-case design studies found that reading interventions
can improve word reading and reading comprehension for students with reading
difficulties and inattention, though results were stronger when comprehension strategies
50
were embedded rather than focusing solely on sight words or passage reading. No
studies assessed whether reading interventions also improved behaviour outcomes.
Overall, the findings highlight a need for more research that explores the academic
effects of behaviour interventions and the behavioural effects of reading interventions for
this student group.
In three systematic reviews, Burke et al. (2015; 2023) and Garwood et al. (2014)
synthesised findings from 20 single-case design studies focused on reading interventions
for students in multiple age groups (age 11 to 18) with, or at risk for, SEMH needs
(reported as EBD in the original study). The intervention strategies varied in terms of
delivery setting, dosage, targeted skills, and outcome measures. These reading
interventions included:
Repeated reading with error correction and performance feedback with a therapy
dog
Headsprout Comprehension with a basal reading instruction program
Teacher model
Computer model
Self-graphing
Intertrial intervals
Immediate intertrial intervals with a 5-second delay
Peer-mediated repeated reading
Sight-word instruction
Choice instructional method and contingency strategy
Graphic organisers
Listening
Text maps
Repeated reading
A modified version of the Direct Instruction Corrective Reading program
The Corrective Reading program plus repeated reading
Teach Your Child to Read in 100 Easy Lessons, the Great Leaps Reading
program.
A number of reading outcomes were also measured including reading fluency, reading
accuracy, and reading comprehension. Some interventions produced strong results for
51
reading outcomes, such as word reading accuracy, but weaker or even negative effects
for behaviour outcomes, highlighting inconsistency in addressing the dual academic and
behavioural challenges common in students with SEMH (reported as EBD in the original
study).
Although most techniques resulted in positive outcomes when findings were aggregated,
the outcomes varied across the individual studies included in the REA. Repeated reading
interventions showed relatively small effects. This finding was also established by
another systematic review in our REA by Collins et al. (2023) who reviewed single-case
studies investigating repeated reading strategies for children and young people with
SEMH. On the other hand, the use of student-generated graphic organisers and teacher
modelling had the largest effects.
Targeted reading interventions summary
Direct instruction
Student-generated graphic organisers
Teacher modelling
Writing interventions
Students with SEMH needs often struggle with expressive writing, including tasks such
as expressing feelings, forming opinions, and exploring ideas (Cramer & Mason, 2014;
Lane, 2004). Additionally, research also shows that students with SEMH needs tend to
perform poorly on written language assessments, with expressive language being a
common area of difficulty (Benner et al., 2002).
Self-Regulated Strategy Development (SRSD) has been identified as an effective,
evidence-based approach for improving persuasive writing skills in students with SEMH
needs, with all studies using SRSD reporting positive outcomes (Ennis & Jolivette,
2014a; Losinski et al., 2014; Sreckovic et al., 2014). Despite increasing interest in literacy
interventions for this group, research remains limited, averaging fewer than three studies
per year over the past decade according to the reviews in our REA.
Although peer-mediated instruction is widely recommended for supporting both reading
and behaviour in students with SEMH needs (Ryan et al., 2004; Watts et al., 2019), none
of the studies in our REA reported using this approach. Peer tutoring, whether cross-age
or same-age, can help address teacher-student ratio issues and reduce the need for one-
on-one instruction.
Several limitations in the evidence base reduce confidence in these findings across all
interventions. Most studies were single-case designs, which offer insight into individual
student responses but limit generalisability. Additionally, many used researcher-
52
developed rather than standardised assessments, making comparisons difficult. Finally,
most interventions were delivered by researchers or specialists, raising questions about
how easily they could be implemented by mainstream teachers.
Summary of support and intervention findings
Our REA identified a total of 33 reviews dedicated to the support and intervention
strategies that mainstream educators can use to support educational outcomes for
children and young people with SEMH needs.
High-quality teaching for children and young people with SEMH needs consisting of
whole school behavioural strategies such as token economies or check-in/check-out
strategies are shown to be effective for pupils with SEMH needs, especially those with
behavioural challenges. However, strong senior leadership and coordination is important
in effectively implementing these strategies. It is also important that strategies are applied
with careful consideration of individual needs rather than a blanket policy so that these
strategies create a positive, supportive, and inclusive environment rather than alienating
pupils. To this extent, educator knowledge and understanding of SEMH needs are
important in understanding what support individual children and young people might
need.
At the classroom level, incorporating targeted and behaviour-specific praise and rewards
to help reinforce positive interactions and motivate students, especially those with
behavioural challenges, can result in a number of positive academic and participation
and engagement outcomes. Teachers can also leverage the interests and motivations of
children with SEMH needs by providing choice in instruction as well as more
opportunities for engagement in discussions. Hands-on activities can also be effective in
motivating and sustaining on-task behaviour of children and young people with SEMH
needs leading to improved educational outcomes. Teachers should consider students'
preferences and adjust strategies accordingly.
A range of instructional techniques have been shown to support learners with SEMH
needs, including prompting, schema-based instruction, modelling, task sequencing, daily
report cards, Direct Instruction, explicit instruction, scaffolding, mnemonics, and cover-
copy-compare (for maths). These methods reduce cognitive and emotional load by
clarifying expectations, breaking learning into manageable steps, and reinforcing positive
behaviours. Explicit approaches (e.g. Direct Instruction) reduce ambiguity and support
engagement; while scaffolding and modelling offer guided learning. Tools like daily report
cards promote self-regulation and home-school communication, and memory aids such
as mnemonics and cover-copy-compare support fluency for learners with attention or
executive function difficulties.
53
Targeted approaches that were found to be effective used similar approaches such as
Direct Instruction, explicit teaching, modelling, scaffolding, prompting and visual supports.
Children and young people with SEMH needs may also benefit from self-regulation, self-
monitoring and organisation skills. Self-Regulated Strategy Development can also be
effective in improving writing outcomes for this group. However, some of these
techniques may need specialists or training to implement. It is also important for teachers
and teaching assistants to support SENCos in organising and implementing exam access
arrangements for more effective exam outcomes. Training for teachers and for students
is also useful in further improving efficacy of access arrangements.
Students with SEMH needs often experience lower reading outcomes than their peers
and may respond less effectively to reading interventions. Our REA identified several
effective intervention strategies across different age groups and targeting different
reading skills, with Direct Instruction emerging as the most consistently effective
approach across multiple systematic reviews. Programmes such as Corrective Reading,
Reading Mastery, PHAB/DI, Sound Partners, and Stepping Stones to Literacy showed
positive impacts on word reading, decoding, and comprehension, particularly for younger
students. Peer-mediated strategies and student-generated graphic organisers also
showed promise.
In contrast, repeated reading strategies produced weaker effects, and evidence on
combined reading-behaviour interventions was mixed, with no strong indication that one
improves the other. Findings from group-based studies suggested that targeted reading
programmes delivered in small groups can lead to strong gains for students with co-
occurring reading and behaviour difficulties. Again, some of these programmes may
require training from an experienced user to administer effectively.
However, a large proportion of the systematic reviews in our REA focusing on reading
interventions for children and young people with SEMH focused on single-case designs
which may pose limitations on the reliability and generalisability of the evidence in this
section. Single-case designs are useful for understanding how individual students
respond to an intervention, especially in specialist settings or with pupils who have
complex needs. However, they have limitations when it comes to proving how effective
something truly is. As these studies involve only one or a few participants, the results
can't easily be generalised to larger groups. They also often lack a comparison group,
making it difficult to know whether improvements are due to the intervention itself or other
factors, such as changes in environment or natural development. While they offer
detailed insights, single-case designs provide a lower level of evidence compared to
larger, well-controlled studies. There is a need for evaluations conducted by teachers or
support staff in real-world school contexts, rather than by researchers.
54
Conclusions
This REA investigated effective tools for the identification, assessment, support, and
collaborative practices for children and young people with SEMH needs. These findings
aimed to support mainstream educators in supporting the educational outcomes of
children and young people with SEMH needs.
Findings highlight the importance of adopting a whole-school, needs-based approach to
the identification and support of SEMH needs in mainstream education. While a range of
evidence-based tools and strategies exist, their effectiveness depends on careful
implementation, strong leadership, and educators' understanding of SEMH. Screening
and assessment are most effective when they draw on multiple informants and are used
to guide support, rather than to diagnose or label. At the classroom level, structured
instructional strategies, targeted praise, and opportunities for engagement can enhance
participation, self-regulation, and academic outcomes. Direct Instruction programmes and
targeted reading interventions show particular promise, though training and resources
are often required.
However, significant gaps remain. Evidence is disproportionately weighted towards
externalising difficulties, while internalising needs and pupil voice are underrepresented.
Many studies also rely on single-case designs, limiting generalisability. Future research
should prioritise scalable, teacher-led evaluations in real-world contexts, alongside
greater attention to internalising needs and the active involvement of pupils in shaping
their support. Addressing these gaps will be essential in developing sustainable, inclusive
practices that enable all children and young people with SEMH needs to thrive in
mainstream education.
55
Appendices
Appendix A: Search terms (PICOS criteria)
We conducted 15 separate searches across five rapid review categories, each focused
on a distinct population: SEMH, SLCN, autism, sensory and/or physical needs, and
cognition and learning. For each population, three searches were performed, focusing
on: identification terms, support terms, and working with others. The intervention,
comparison, and study type remained consistent across all searches, while the
population and outcome terms varied to capture the unique characteristics of each group.
This approach ensured a comprehensive examination of the research literature across
the different populations. PICOS stands for: (1) Population; (2) Intervention; (3)
Comparison; (4) Outcomes; and (5) Study type.
Population:
Population terms: "adolescent" OR child* OR "children and young people" OR kid*
OR "post 16" OR pupil* OR "school aged" OR student* OR teen* OR "young
learner*" OR "young people" OR "young person" OR youth
Educational setting terms: "alternat* educat*" OR class* OR "class* setting" OR
"comprehensive school*" OR "early year*" OR educat* OR elementary OR
"elementary school*" OR "extra-curricular setting*" OR "further educat*" OR
"further educat* setting*" OR "grammar school*" OR "high school" OR "higher
educat*" OR inclus* OR kindergarten OR "learning environment*" OR mainstream*
OR "middle school*" OR nursery OR preschool OR "primary educat*" OR "primary
school*" OR reception OR "remedi* class*" OR "school setting" OR school* OR
"secondary education*" OR "secondary school*" OR "special educat*" OR
"university" OR "whole school" OR "independent school"
General SEND terms: SEND OR SEN OR "special educat* need*" OR "special
need*" OR "learning difficult*" OR "learning disab*" OR "learning difference" OR
"additional need*" OR impair* OR disorder* OR neurodivergent OR "additional
learning need"
SEMH needs terms: ADD OR ADHD OR EBD OR OCD OR SEMH OR "affect*
disorder*" OR anxiet* OR "anxiety disorder*" OR "attention deficit disorder" OR
"attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" OR "attention deficit*" OR "attention
difficult*" OR "behavior disorder*" OR "behavior problem*" OR "conduct disorder*"
OR "conduct problem*" OR depress* OR "emotion* regulat*" OR "emotional and
behaviral difficulties" OR "emotional disorder" OR "emotional problem*" OR
"emotional symptom*" OR "emotional wellbeing" OR hyperactivity OR inattention
OR "mental disorder*" OR "mental health" OR "mental illness*" OR "mood
disorder*" OR "obsessive compulsive disorder*" OR "oppositional defiant
56
disorder*" OR "peer relation* problem*" OR "psychiatric disorder*" OR
"psychological health" OR "psychosocial difficult*" OR "self-esteem" OR "self-
regulat*" OR "social emotional and mental health" OR "social emotional*"
Intervention:
Identification terms: assess* OR "assessment app*" OR "assessment tools" OR
"behavio* checklist*" OR checklist OR "class* assess*" OR "classroom
observation" OR "cognitive assess*" OR "computer* app" OR "curriculum-based
measure" OR diagnos* OR "dynamic assessment" OR "early screening tools" OR
"educational assessment tool*" OR evaluate OR "formal assess*" OR "formative
assess*" OR "graduated approach" OR identif* OR "informal assess*" OR
measure OR "multi-disciplinary assessment" OR MTSS OR "multi-tiered system of
supports" OR "neuro* assess*" OR observ* OR "parent* report" OR "pupil
observation" OR "response to intervention" OR RTI OR screen* OR "self-
assessment" OR "self-report" OR "smartphone app*" OR "standard* test*" OR
"student observation" OR "tablet app*" OR "teacher judgment*" OR "teacher
observation" OR tool* OR "performance-based"
Support terms: "classroom environment" OR "SEN support" OR "SEND support"
OR SWPBS OR accommodat* OR adaptat* OR approach OR "assistive tech*" OR
"classroom interve*" OR "collaborative teach*" OR curriculum OR "curriculum
adapt*" OR "differentiat* instruction" OR "digital learning" OR "early interven*" OR
"education* program*" OR "education* support" OR "evidence-based interven*"
OR "evidence-informed interven*" OR "exam access arrangement*" OR "exam
accommodat*" OR "graduated approach" OR "group intervention" OR "high-quality
instruct*" OR "high-quality teach*" OR inclus* OR "inclusive education" OR
"inclusive practice" OR "individual support" OR "individual* education plan*" OR
"instruct" OR interven* OR integrat* OR "mainstream class* support" OR
"mainstream education" OR "mainstream environment" OR "multimedia learning
environment" OR "multi-tiered system* of support" OR "one-to-one" OR "parental
support" OR pedagog* OR "peer support" OR personali*ed OR provision OR
remediat OR "school support service*" OR "school-based" OR "special* interven*"
OR "special* support" OR "specialist teach* support" OR support* OR strateg* OR
"targeted interven*" OR "target* teach* strateg*" OR targeted OR "targeted
support" OR teach* OR "teach* adaptation*" OR "teach* principle*" OR "teach*
strateg*" OR "teach* approach" OR therapy OR "tier 1 interven*" OR "tier 1
support" OR "tier 2 interve*" OR "tier 2 support" OR "tier 3 interven*" OR "tier 3
support" OR treat* OR "universal design" OR "universal interven*" OR "universal
provision" OR "universal support" OR "whole-class support" OR "whole-class
teaching"
57
Working with others terms: collabor* OR parent* OR carer OR caregiver OR famil*
OR specialist* OR "specialist teacher" OR teacher OR educator OR TA OR
"teaching assistant*" OR "support staff" OR "educational psychologist*" OR EP OR
SLT or SLP or "speech and language therapist*" OR "speech and language
pathologist*" OR "speech therapist" OR "speech pathologist" OR "health visitor"
OR HV* OR "Ed Psych" OR counsel* OR "mental health support workers" OR
"child and adolescent mental health service" OR CAHMS OR psychologist* or
therapist* OR "learning support assistant" OR LSA OR "communication support
worker" OR QTOD OR QTMSI OR QTVI OR "co-production" OR "joint working"
OR "healthcare professional" OR "personal carer" OR "occupational therapist"
"Inter-professional collaboration" OR IPC OR expert OR clinician OR nurse
Comparison:
Left blank to include studies without comparison groups
Outcome:
Identification terms: N/A Not needed for identification terms as there is not
always a specific outcome
Behavioural, Inclusion, Motivation, and Engagement terms: attendance OR
"behavio* outcomes" OR "behavio* regulation" OR "behavio* improvement" OR
"cognitive development" OR "communication skills" OR criminal OR economic OR
employment OR engage* OR financial OR "functional independence" OR
"functional skills development" OR "access to learning" OR "improvement in
learning" OR "inclusive classroom" OR "increase* inclusion" OR "independent
living" OR independent* OR "mental health outcomes" OR motivate* OR offend
OR "prosocial behavio* OR "reduce* learning barriers" OR "reduce* symptom*"
OR "self-regulat*" OR "school performance" OR "school retention" OR "social
inclusion" OR "social-emotional development" OR "teacher perceptions of student
progress" OR "well-being" OR workplace
Educational outcomes (General): "academic achievement" OR "academic
progress*" OR "academic attainment" OR "academic measure" OR "academic
performance" OR "additional learning support*" OR "educat* achievement" OR
"educat* assess*" OR "educat* attainment" OR "educat* measure" OR "educat*
outcome*" OR "educat* performance" OR "educat* progress" "executive function*"
OR "functional skill* develop*"OR "improve* learning" OR learn* OR "learning
progress" OR "problem solving" OR "reduced learning barriers" OR "school
outcome*" OR "school performance" OR "school retention"
Literacy outcomes: read* OR literacy OR "letter recognition" OR "letter-sound
knowledge" OR "word reading" OR phonic* OR phonolog* OR "reading
58
comprehension" OR "reading accuracy" OR "reading fluency" OR "reading delay*"
OR "print knowledge" OR decod* OR "alphabet knowledge" OR "listening
comprehension" OR "word recognition" OR "sentence completion"
Writing outcomes: writ* OR literacy OR punctuation OR spelling OR "sentence
writing" OR "free writing" OR "early writing" OR "emergent writing" OR "guided
writing" OR "writing fluency" OR handwriting OR "interactive writing" OR "letter
typing" OR "sentence completion"
Mathematics outcomes: math* OR numer* OR numb* "number sense" OR
arithmetic* OR geomet* OR shape OR calcul* OR algebra OR counting OR
addition OR subtraction OR multiplication OR division OR fractions OR statistics*
OR "place value" OR "math* competenc*" OR "math* concept*" OR "math*
knowledge"
Working with others terms: collaboration* or partnership* or co-practice* or
multidisciplinary* or transdisciplinary or interdisciplinary
Study type:
Review type: review OR "systematic review" OR "meta-analysis" OR "narrative
review"
59
References
*Indicates references retrieved from the rapid review
ABIKOFF, H. B., JENSEN, P. S., ARNOLD, L. L., HOZA, B., HECHTMAN, L., POLLACK,
S., MARTIN, D., ALVIR, J., MARCH, J. S., HINSHAW, S., VITIELLO, B.,
NEWCORN, J., GREINER, A., CANTWELL, D. P., CONNERS, C. K., ELLIOTT,
G., GREENHILL, L. L., KRAEMER, H., PELHAM, W.E., JR., SEVERE, J. B.,
SWANSON, J. M., WELLS, K. & WIGAL, T. 2002. Observed classroom behavior
of children with ADHD: relationship to gender and comorbidity. Journal of
Abnormal Child Psychology, 30, 349-59.
ADAMS, G. & ENGELMANN, S. 1996. Research on Direct Instruction: 25 Years beyond
DISTAR, Seattle, WA., Educational Achievement Systems.
*ADAMSON, R. M. & WACHSMUTH, S. T. 2014. A Review of Direct Observation
Research within the past Decade in the Field of Emotional and Behavioral
Disorders. Behavioral Disorders, 39, 181-189.
*ALLEN, A. N., KILGUS, S. P., BURNS, M. K. & HODGSON, C. 2018. Surveillance of
Internalizing Behaviors: A Reliability and Validity Generalization Study of Universal
Screening Evidence. School Mental Health, 11, 194-209.
*ALSALAMAH, A. 2017. Use of the Self-Monitoring Strategy among Students wiht
Attention DEficit Hyperacitivty Disorder: A systematics Review. Journal of
Education and Practice, 8, 118-125.
*ANDERSON, J. K., FORD, T., SONESON, E., COON, J. T., HUMPHREY, A., ROGERS,
M., MOORE, D., JONES, P. B., CLARKE, E. & HOWARTH, E. 2019. A systematic
review of effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of school-based identification of
children and young people at risk of, or currently experiencing mental health
difficulties. Psychological Medicine, 49, 9-19.
ANTALEK, C., ROBERTS, A. & SUMNER, E. 2025. Understanding exam access
arrangements in practice: challenges and opportunities. Preprint.
ARCHER, A. & HUGHES, C. 2011. Explicit Instruction: Effective and Efficient Teaching,
New York, Guiford Publications.
ARNOLD, C. & BAKER, T. 2012. Transitions from school to work: Applying psychology
to'NEET'. Educational & Child Psychology, 29.
60
ATKINSON, R. C. 1975. Mnemotechnics in second-language learning. American
Psychologist, 30, 821-828.
BARKLEY, R. A. 2011. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, self-regulation, and
executive functioning. Handbook of self-regulation: Research, theory, and
applications, 2nd ed. New York, NY, US: The Guilford Press.
BECKER, B. E. & LUTHAR, S. S. 2002. Social-emotional factors affecting achivement
outcomes among disadvantaged students: Closing the achivement gap.
Educational Psychologist, 37, 197-214.
*BECKER-HAIMES, E. M., TABACHNICK, A. R., LAST, B. S., STEWART, R. E.,
HASAN-GRANIER, A. & BEIDAS, R. S. 2020. Evidence Base Update for Brief,
Free, and Accessible Youth Mental Health Measures. Journal of Clinical Child &
Adolescent Psychology, 49, 1-17.
BENNER, G. J., NELSON, J. R. & EPSTEIN, M. H. 2002. Language Skills of Children
with EBD:A Literature Review. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 10,
43-56.
BETTINI, E., CUMMING, M. M., BRUNSTING, N. C., MCKENNA, J. W., COOPER
SCHNEIDER, C., MULLER, R. & PEYTON, D. 2020. Administrators' Roles:
Providing Special Educators with Opportunities to Learn and Enact Effective
Reading Practices for Students With EBD. Beyond Behavior, 29, 52-61.
*BIKIC, A., REICHOW, B., MCCAULEY, S. A., IBRAHIM, K. & SUKHODOLSKY, D. G.
2017. Meta-analysis of organizational skills interventions for children and
adolescents with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Clinical Psychology
Review, 52, 108-123.
BLANCO-BAYO, A. & RERAKI, M. 2025. So, what is it then; special need, SEMH, both
or none? An assessment framework to value their interplay. Emotional and
Behavioural Difficulties, 30, 88-101.
BOON, R. T., BURKE, M. D. & BOWMAN-PERROTT, L. 2020. Literacy instruction for
students with emotional and behavioral disorders: Research-based interventions
for classroom practice, IAP.
*BOWMAN-PERROTT, L., RAGAN, K., BOON, R.T. AND BURKE, M.D., 2023. Peer
tutoring interventions for students with or at-risk for emotional and behavioral
disorders: A systematic review of reviews. Behavior Modification, 47(3), pp. .777-
815.
61
BURKE, M. D., BOON, R. T., BOWMAN-PERROTT, L. & HATTON, H. 2023. In Need of
a Research Base: Evidence-Based Reading Interventions for Elementary Students
with Overlapping EBD and LD. Learning Disabilities: A Contemporary Journal, 21,
87-110.
*BURKE, M. D., BOON, R. T., HATTON, H. & BOWMAN-PERROTT, L. 2015. Reading
Interventions for Middle and Secondary Students With Emotional and Behavioral
Disorders:A Quantitative Review of Single-Case Studies. Behavior Modification,
39, 43-68.
CAFARO, C. L., GONZALEZ MOLINA, E., PATTON, E., MCMAHON, S. D. & BROWN,
M. 2023. Meta-analyses of teacher-delivered trauma-based and trauma-informed
care interventions. Psychological Trauma, 15, 1177-1187.
CAMPBELL, A. R., BOWMAN-PERROTT, L., BURKE, M. D. & SALLESE, M. R. 2018.
Reading, Writing, Math, and Content-Area Interventions for Improving Behavioral
and Academic Outcomes of Students with Emotional and Behavioral Disorders.
Learning Disabilities: A Contemporary Journal, 16, 119-138.
CARROLL, C. & HURRY, J. 2018. Supporting pupils in school with social, emotional and
mental health needs: a scoping review of the literature. Emotional and behavioural
difficulties, 23, 310-325.
*CARROLL, J., BRADLEY, L., CRAWFORD, H., HANNANT, P., JOHNSON, H. &
THOMPSON, A. 2017. SEN support: A rapid evidence assessment, Department
for Education.
CHAFOULEAS, S. M., VOLPE, R. J., GRESHAM, F. M. & COOK, C. R. 2010. School-
based behavioral assessment within problem-solving models: Current status and
future directions. School Psychology Review, 39, 343-349.
*CHITIYO, A., KING, S., WOJTON, J. & DZENGA, C. 2023. Evidence Based Reading
Interventions for Students with EBD: A Systematic Review and Quality Evaluation
of Research Methods. Learning Disabilities: A Contemporary Journal, 21, 133-
157.
*COLLINS, L. W., COOK, S. E. C., NINCI, J. & WEINGRAD, I. 2023. The Effects of
Repeated Reading on Fluency for Students With and at Risk for EBD: An
Evidence-Based Review. Behavioral Disorders, 49, 46-60.
62
COOK, C. R., RASETSHWANE, K. B., TRUELSON, E., GRANT, S., DART, E. H.,
COLLINS, T. A. & SPRAGUE, J. 2011. Development and Validation of the Student
Internalizing Behavior Screener: Examination of Reliability, Validity, and
Classification Accuracy. Assessment for Effective Intervention, 36, 71-79.
CRAMER, A. M. & MASON, L. H. 2014. The Effects of Strategy Instruction for Writing
and Revising Persuasive Quick Writes for Middle School Students with Emotional
and Behavioral Disorders. Behavioral Disorders, 40, 37-51.
DARNEY, D., REINKE, W.M., HERMAN, K. C., STORMONT, M. & IALONGO, N. S.
2013. Children with co-occurring academic and behavior problems in first grade:
distal outcomes in twelfth grade. Journal of School Psychology, 51, 117-28.
*DART, E. H., ARORA, P. G., COLLINS, T. A. & DOLL, B. 2019. Progress Monitoring
Measures for Internalizing Symptoms: A Systematic Review of the Peer-Reviewed
Literature. School Mental Health, 11, 265-275.
DFE 2015. Special educational needs and disability code of practice: 0 to 25 years
(Updated 2024). UK Government.
DFE 2025. Special educational needs in England: 2024-25. UK Government.
DILALLA, L. F., MARCUS, J. L. & WRIGHT-PHILLIPS, M. V. 2004. Longitudinal effects
of preschool behavioral styles on early adolescent school performance. Journal of
School Psychology, 42, 385-401.
DRUMMOND, T. 1994. Student Risk Screening Scale (SRSS), APA PsychTests.
*DUNN, M.E., SHELNUT, J., RYAN, J.B. AND KATSIYANNIS, A., 2017. A systematic
review of peer-mediated interventions on the academic achievement of students
with emotional/behavioral disorders. Education and Treatment of Children, 40(4),
pp.497-524.
ENGELMANN, S. & BRUNER, E. C. 1988. Reading mastery I/II fast cycle: teacher's
guide, Chicago, Science Research Associates.
ENGELMANN, S., HADDOX, P., HANNER, S. & OSBORN, J. 2002. Corrective reading
thinking basics: Comprehension level A, Columbus, OH, SRA/McGraw-Hill.
ENGELMANN, S., JOHNSON, G., CARNINE, L., MEYER, L., BECKER, W. & EISELE, J.
1988a. Corrective reading: decoding strategies, decoding B1, Chicago, Science
Research Associates.
ENGELMANN, S., JOHNSON, G. L. & CARNINE, L. 1988b. Corrective reading: word
attack basics, decoding A., Chicago, Science Research Associates.
63
ENNIS, R. P. & JOLIVETTE, K. 2014. Existing research and future directions for self-
regulated strategy development with students with and at risk for emotional and
behavioral disorders. The Journal of Special Education, 48, 32-45.
*FABIANO, G. A., SCHATZ, N. K., ALOE, A. M., CHACKO, A. & CHRONIS-TUSCANO,
A. 2015. A Systematic Review of Meta-Analyses of Psychosocial Treatment for
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Clinical Child and Family Psychology
Review, 18, 77-97.
FORBES, E. E. & DAHL, R. E. 2005. Neural systems of positive affect: Relevance to
understanding child and adolescent depression? Development and
Psychopathology, 17, 827-850.
FUCHS, L. S. & FUCHS, D. 2006. Introduction to response to intervention: What, why,
and how valid is it? Reading Research Quarterly, 41, 93-99.
FUCHS, L. S. & FUCHS, D. 2009. On the Importance of a Unified Model of
Responsiveness to Intervention. Child Development Perspectives, 3, 41-43.
*GARCIA-ROSALES, A., CORTESE, S. & VITORATOU, S. 2024. Measurement
invariance of Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder symptom criteria as rated by
parents and teachers in children and adolescents: A systematic review. PLOS
ONE, 19, e0293677.
GARRITTY, C., HAMEL, C., TRIVELLA, M., GARTLEHNER, G., NUSSBAUMER-
STREIT, B., DEVANE, D., KAMEL, C., GRIEBLER, U. & KING, V. 2024. Updated
recommendations for the Cochrane rapid review methods guidance for rapid
reviews of effectiveness. British Medical Journal, 384, e076335.
*GARWOOD, J. D., BRUNSTING, N. C. & FOX, L. C. 2014. Improving Reading
Comprehension and Fluency Outcomes for Adolescents With Emotional-
Behavioral Disorders: Recent Research Synthesized. Remedial and Special
Education, 35, 181-194.
GASKINS, I., DOWNER, M. & GASKINS, R. 1986. Introduction to the Benchmark school
word identification/vocabulary development program. Media, PA: Benchmark
School.
GOODMAN, R. 1997. The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire: A Research Note.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 38, 581-586.
GREENE, R. W., BIEDERMAN, J., ZERWAS, S., MONUTEAUX, M. C., GORING, J. C. &
FARAONE, S. V. 2002. Psychiatric comorbidity, family dysfunction, and social
64
impairment in referred youth with oppositional defiant disorder. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 159, 1214-24.
GREENWOOD, C. R., CARTA, J. J. & DAWSON, H. 2000. Ecobehavioral Assessment
Systems Software (EBASS): A system for observation in education settings.
Behavioral observation: Technology and applications in developmental disabilities.
Baltimore, MD, US: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co.
GRESHAM, F. M., COOK, C. R., COLLINS, T., DART, E., RASETSHWANE, K.,
TRUELSON, E. & GRANT, S. 2010. Developing a change-sensitive brief behavior
rating scale as a progress monitoring tool for social behavior: An example using
the social skills rating system-teacher form. School Psychology Review, 39, 364-
379.
GWERNAN-JONES, R., MOORE, D. A., GARSIDE, R., RICHARDSON, M.,
THOMPSON-COON, J., ROGERS, M., COOPER, P., STEIN, K. & FORD, T.
2015. ADHD, parent perspectives and parent-teacher relationships: grounds for
conflict. British Journal of Special Education, 42, 279-300.
HICKINBOTHAM, L. & SONI, A. 2021. A systematic literature review exploring the views
and experiences of children and young people of the label Social, Emotional and
Mental Health (SEMH). Emotional and Behavioural Difficulties, 26, 135-150.
HINSHAW, S. P., NGUYEN, P. T., O'GRADY, S. M. & ROSENTHAL, E. A. 2021. Annual
Research Review: Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in girls and women:
underrepresentation, longitudinal processes, and key directions. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 63, 484-496.
IJAZ, S., NOBLES, J., MAMLUK, L., DAWSON, S., CURRAN, B., PRYOR, R.,
REDWOOD, S. & SAVOVIć, J. 2024. Disciplinary behaviour management
strategies in schools and their impact on student psychosocial outcomes: A
systematic review. NIHR Open Research, 4, 13.
JACOBSON, L. A., RYAN, M., DENCKLA, M. B., MOSTOFSKY, S. H. & MAHONE, E. M.
2013. Performance Lapses in Children with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Contribute to Poor Reading Fluency. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 28,
672-683.
*JENKINS, L. N., DEMARAY, M. K., WREN, N. S., SECORD, S. M., LYELL, K. M.,
MAGERS, A. M., SETMEYER, A. J., RODELO, C., NEWCOMB-MCNEAL, E. &
TENNANT, J. 2014. A Critical Review of Five Commonly Used Social-Emotional
65
and Behavioral Screeners for Elementary or Secondary Schools. Contemporary
School Psychology, 18, 241-254.
*JOHNSON, C. L., GROSS, M. A., JORM, A. F. & HART, L. M. 2023. Mental Health
Literacy for Supporting Children: A Systematic Review of Teacher and
Parent/Carer Knowledge and Recognition of Mental Health Problems in
Childhood. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 26, 569-591.
JOINT COUNCIL FOR QUALIFICATIONS 2024. Access Arrangements and Reasonable
Adjustments.
JORM, A. F. 2012. Mental health literacy: empowering the community to take action for
better mental health. American Psychologist, 67, 231-43.
JORM, A. F., KORTEN, A. E., JACOMB, P. A., CHRISTENSEN, H., RODGERS, B. &
POLLITT, P. 1997. "Mental health literacy": a survey of the public's ability to
recognise mental disorders and their beliefs about the effectiveness of treatment.
Medical Journal of Australia, 166, 182-6.
*KALINDJIAN, N., HIROT, F., STONA, A. C., HUAS, C. & GODART, N. 2022. Early
detection of eating disorders: a scoping review. Eating and Weight Disorders, 27,
21-68.
KALLAPIRAN, K., KOO, S., KIRUBAKARAN, R. & HANCOCK, K. 2015. Review:
Effectiveness of mindfulness in improving mental health symptoms of children and
adolescents: a meta-analysis. Child and Adolescent Mental Health, 20, 182-194.
KAUFFMAN, J. & LANDRUM, T. 2013. Characteristics of Emotional and Behavioral
Disorders of Children and Youth (International Edition), Boston, Pearson/Merrill.
*KEATING, J., GAFFNEY, R., BRAMHAM, J. AND DOWNES, M., 2022. Sensory
modulation difficulties and assessment in children with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder: A systematic review. European Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 19(1), pp. 110-144.
KILGUS, S. P. & VON DER EMBSE, N. P. 2014. Unpublished technical manual of the
Social, Academic, and Emotional Behvior Risk Screener.
*KNOWLES, C., MENG, P. & MACHALICEK, W. 2015. Task Sequencing for Students
With Emotional and Behavioral Disorders:A Systematic Review. Behavior
Modification, 39, 136-166.
KORPERSHOEK, H., CANRINUS, E. T., FOKKENS-BRUINSMA, M. & DE BOER, H.
2020. The relationships between school belonging and students' motivational,
66
social-emotional, behavioural, and academic outcomes in secondary education: a
meta-analytic review. Research Papers in Education, 35, 641-680.
KRAFT, M. A. 2020. Interpreting Effect Sizes of Education Interventions. Educational
Researcher, 49, 241-253.
KUYKEN, W., BALL, S., CRANE, C., GANGULI, P., JONES, B., MONTERO-MARIN, J.,
NUTHALL, E., RAJA, A., TAYLOR, L., TUDOR, K., VINER, R. M., ALLWOOD, M.,
AUKLAND, L., DUNNING, D., CASEY, T., DALRYMPLE, N., DE, W., K., FARLEY,
E., HARPER, J., KAPPELMANN, N., KEMPNICH, M., LORD, L., MEDLICOTT, E.,
PALMER, L., PETIT, A., PHILIPS, A., PRYOR-NITSCH, I., RADLEY, L., SONLEY,
A., SHACKLEFORD, J., TICKELL, A., BLAKEMORE, S., THE, M. T.,
UKOUMUNNE, O. C., GREENBERG, M. T., FORD, T., DALGLEISH, T.,
BYFORD, S. & WILLIAMS, J. M. G. 2022. Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
universal school-based mindfulness training compared with normal school
provision in reducing risk of mental health problems and promoting well-being in
adolescence: the MYRIAD cluster randomised controlled trial. Evidence Based
Mental Health, 25.
LANE, K. L. 2004. Academic instruction and tutoring interventions for students with
emotional and behavioral disorders. In: RUTHERFORD JR, R. B., MAGEE QUINN
, M. & MATHUR, S. R. (eds.) Handbook of research in emotional and behavioral
disorders.
LANE, K. L., LITTLE, M. A., REDDING-RHODES, J., PHILLIPS, A. & WELSH, M. T.
2007. Outcomes of a Teacher-Led Reading Intervention for Elementary Students
at Risk for Behavioral Disorders. Exceptional Children, 74, 47-70.
LANE, K. L. & MENZIES, H. M. 2009. Student Risk Screening Scale for Early
Internalizing and Externalizing Behavior (SRSS-IE).
LANGBERG, J. M., EPSTEIN, J. N., BECKER, S. P., GIRIO-HERRERA, E. & VAUGHN,
A. J. 2012. Evaluation of the Homework, Organization, and Planning Skills
(HOPS) Intervention for Middle School Students with ADHD as Implemented by
School Mental Health Providers. School Psychology Review, 41, 342-364.
LANGBERG, J. M., VAUGHN, A. J., WILLIAMSON, P., EPSTEIN, J. N., GIRIO-
HERRERA, E. & BECKER, S. P. 2011. Refinement of an Organizational Skills
Intervention for Adolescents with ADHD for Implementation by School Mental
Health Providers. School Mental Health, 3, 143-155.
67
LANGE, K. W., REICHL, S., LANGE, K. M., TUCHA, L. & TUCHA, O. 2010. The history
of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Attention Deficit Hyperactactivity
Disorders, 2, 241-55.
*LAW, J., LEE, W., LINDSAY, G., ROULSTONE, S., WREN, Y. & ZENG, B. 2012. "What
Works": Interventions for children and young people with speech, language and
communication needs.
LIPSEY, M. W., PUZIO, K., YUN, C., HEBERT, M. A., STEINKA-FRY, K., COLE, M. W.,
ROBERTS, M., ANTHONY, K. S. & BUSICK, M. D. 2012. Translating the
Statistical Representation of the Effects of Education Interventions into More
Readily Interpretable Forms. National Center for Special Education Research.
LOSINSKI, M., CUENCA-CARLINO, Y., ZABLOCKI, M. & TEAGARDEN, J. 2014.
Examining the Efficacy of Self-Regulated Strategy Development for Students with
Emotional or Behavioral Disorders: A Meta-Analysis. Behavorial Disorders, 40, 52-
67.
LOVETT, B. J. & LEWANDOWSKI, L. J. 2015. Testing accommodations for students with
disabilities: Research-based practice, American Psychological Association.
*LOVETT, B. J. & NELSON, J. M. 2021. Systematic Review: Educational
Accommodations for Children and Adolescents With Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity.
Disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 60,
448-457.
LOVETT, M., BORDEN, S., DELUCA, T., LACERENZA, L., BENSON, N. &
BRACKSTONE, D. 1994. Treating the Core Deficits of Developmental Dyslexia:
Evidence of Transfer of Learning After Phonologically- and Strategy-Based
Reading Training Programs. Developmental Psychology, 30, 805-822.
LOVETT, M. W., LACERENZA, L. & BORDEN, S. L. 2000. Putting struggling readers on
the PHAST track: A program to integrate phonological and strategy-based
remedial reading instruction and maximize outcomes. Journal of Learning
Disabilities, 33, 458-476.
MANSFIELD, E. M. G. & SONI, A. 2024. 'I have it, so I understand it, I feel it': The
secondary school experiences of adolescent females with ADHD in England.
Journal of Research in Special Educational Needs, 24, 681-695.
68
*MARKELZ, A. M. & TAYLOR, J. C. 2016. Effects of Teacher Praise on Attending
Behaviors and Academic Achievement of Students with Emotional and Behavioral
Disabilities. The Journal of Special Apprenticeship, 5.
MARTIN-DENHAM, S. 2020. Social, emotional and mental health and school exclusions
research [Commissioned research study]. University of Sunderland.
MAY, F., FORD, T., JANSSENS, A., NEWLOVE-DELGADO, T., EMMA RUSSELL, A.,
SALIM, J., UKOUMUNNE, O. C. & HAYES, R. 2021. Attainment, attendance, and
school difficulties in UK primary schoolchildren with probable ADHD. British
Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 442-462.
MCINTOSH, K. & GOODMAN, S. 2016. Integrated Multi-Tiered Systems of Support:
Blending RTI and PBIS.
*MCKENNA, J. W., BRIGHAM, F., GARWOOD, J., ZURAWSKI, L., KOC, M., LAVIN, C.
& WERUNGA, R. 2021. A systematic review of intervention studies for young
children with emotional and behavioral disorders: identifying the research base.
Journal of Research in Special Educational Needs, 21, 120-145.
MERCER, C. D. & CAMPBELL, K. U. 1998. Great leaps reading program, Gainsville,
Diar Muid Inc.
*MOORE, D. A., RUSSELL, A. E., MATTHEWS, J., FORD, T. J., ROGERS, M.,
UKOUMUNNE, O. C., KNEALE, D., THOMPSON-COON, J., SUTCLIFFE, K.,
NUNNS, M., SHAW, L. & GWERNAN-JONES, R. 2018. School-based
interventions for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: A systematic review with
multiple synthesis methods. Review of Education, 6, 209-263.
MORABITO, G., BARBI, E., GHIRARDO, S., BRAMUZZO, M., CONVERSANO, E.,
VENTURA, A. & COZZI, G. 2021. Mental health problems in children admitted
with physical symptoms. European Journal of Pediatrics, 180, 1611-1615.
MORGAN, A. J., ROSS, A. & REAVLEY, N. J. 2018. Systematic review and meta-
analysis of Mental Health First Aid training: Effects on knowledge, stigma, and
helping behaviour. PLoS One, 13, e0197102.
*MULRANEY, M., ARRONDO, G., MUSULLULU, H., ITURMENDI-SABATER, I.,
CORTESE, S., WESTWOOD, S. J., DONNO, F., BANASCHEWSKI, T.,
SIMONOFF, E., ZUDDAS, A., DöPFNER, M., HINSHAW, S. P. & COGHILL, D.
2022. Systematic Review and Meta-analysis: Screening Tools for Attention-
69
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children and Adolescents. Journal of the
American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 61, 982-996.
NELSON, J. R., BENNER, G. J., LANE, K. & SMITH, B. W. 2004. Academic
Achievement of K-12 Students With Emotional and Behavioral Disorders.
Exceptional Children, 71, 59-73.
NYE, E., GARDNER, F., HANSFORD, L., EDWARDS, V., HAYES, R. & FORD, T. 2016.
Classroom behaviour management strategies in response to problematic
behaviours of primary school children with special educational needs: views of
special educational needs coordinators. Emotional and Behavioural Difficulties,
21, 43-60.
*OLSSON, Å. 2023. Teachers' gendered perceptions of attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder - a literature review. European Journal of Special Needs Education, 38,
303-316.
POPHAM, M., COUNTS, J., RYAN, J. B. & KATSIYANNIS, A. 2018. A systematic review
of self-regulation strategies to improve academic outcomes of students with EBD.
Journal of Research in Special Educational Needs, 18, 239-253.
QUINN, P. O. & MADHOO, M. 2014. A review of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in
women and girls: uncovering this hidden diagnosis. Primary Care Companion for
CNS Disorders, 16.
*RALSTON, N. C., BENNER, G. J., TSAI, S.-F., RICCOMINI, P. J. & NELSON, J. R.
2014. Mathematics Instruction for Students With Emotional and Behavioral
Disorders: A Best-Evidence Synthesis. Preventing School Failure: Alternative
Education for Children and Youth, 58, 1-16.
RIVERA, M. O., AL-OTAIBA, S. & KOORLAND, M. A. 2006. Reading Instruction for
Students with Emotional and Behavioral Disorders and at Risk of Antisocial
Behaviors in Primary Grades: Review of Literature. Behavioral Disorders, 31, 323-
339.
ROBERTS, G., LINDSTRöM, E., JIMENEZ, Z., GHOSH, E., MEHMEDOVIC, S.,
MCFADDEN, K. & BAHADORI FALLAH, M. 2023. Intervention Research for
Students with Co-occurring Reading Difficulties and Inattention: A Systematic
Review of Single-Case Design Studies. Journal of Behavioral Education, 33, 721-
745.
70
*ROBERTS, G. J., CHO, E., GARWOOD, J. D., GOBLE, G. H., ROBERTSON, T. &
HODGES, A. 2019. Reading Interventions for Students with Reading and
Behavioral Difficulties: a Meta-analysis and Evaluation of Co-occurring Difficulties.
Educational Psychology Review, 32, 17-47.
*ROYER, D. J., LANE, K. L., CANTWELL, E. D. & MESSENGER, M. L. 2017. A
Systematic Review of the Evidence Base for Instructional Choice in K-12 Settings.
Behavioral Disorders, 42, 89-107.
RYAN, J. B., REID, R. & EPSTEIN, M. H. 2004. Peer-Mediated Intervention Studies on
Academic Achievement for Students with EBD:A Review. Remedial and Special
Education, 25, 330-341.
SCHUELE, C. M. & BOUDREAU, D. 2008. Phonological awareness intervention: beyond
the basics. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 39, 3-20.
SCIUTTO, M. J., TERJESEN, M. D. & FRANK, A. S. B. 2000. Teachers' knowledge and
misperceptions of Attention-Deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Psychology in the
Schools, 37, 115-122.
SCIUTTO, M. J., TERJESEN, M. D., KUčEROVá, A., MICHALOVá, Z., SCHMIEDELER,
S., ANTONOPOULOU, K., SHAKER, N. Z., LEE, J.-Y., ALKAHTANI, K., DRAKE,
B. & ROSSOUW, J. 2016. Cross-national comparisons of teachers' knowledge
and misconceptions of ADHD. International Perspectives in Psychology:
Research, Practice, Consultation, 5, 34-50.
SCRUGGS, T. E. & MASTROPIERI, M. A. 2000. The effectiveness of mnemonic
instruction for students with learning and behavior problems: An update and
research synthesis. Journal of Behavioral Education, 10, 163-173.
SHAPIRO, E. S. 2011. Academic skills problems fourth edition workbook, New York,
Guildford Press.
SHEA, B. J., REEVES, B. C., WELLS, G., THUKU, M., HAMEL, C., MORAN, J.,
MOHER, D., TUGWELL, P., WELCH, V., KRISTJANSSON, E. & HENRY, D. A.
2017. AMSTAR 2: a critical appraisal tool for systematic reviews that include
randomised or non-randomised studies of healthcare interventions, or both. British
Medical Journal, 358, j4008.
SHERMAN, J., RASMUSSEN, C. & BAYDALA, L. 2008. The impact of teacher factors on
achievement and behavioural outcomes of children with Attention
71
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD): a review of the literature. Educational
Research, 50, 347-360.
SRECKOVIC, M. A., COMMON, E. A., KNOWLES, M. M. & LANE, K. L. 2014. A Review
of Self-Regulated Strategy Development for Writing for Students with EBD.
Behavioral Disorders, 39, 56-77.
STAFF, A. I., OOSTERLAAN, J., VAN DER OORD, S., HOEKSTRA, P. J., VERTESSEN,
K., DE VRIES, R., VAN DEN HOOFDAKKER, B. J. & LUMAN, M. 2021. The
Validity of Teacher Rating Scales for the assessment of ADHD symptoms in the
classroom: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Attention Disorders,
25, 1578-1593.
STEWART, A. A. & AUSTIN, C. R. 2019. Reading Interventions for Students With or At
Risk of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: A Systematic Review. Remedial
and Special Education, 41, 352-367.
SUGAI, G. & HORNER, R. H. 2002. Introduction to the Special Series on Positive
Behavior Support in Schools. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 10,
130-135.
*TAN, P. 2016. Developing mathematical understanding and students with emotional and
behavioural disorders: a review of the literature. Emotional and Behavioural
Difficulties, 21, 361-376.
TAPP, J. & WEHBY, J. 1993. MOOSES: Multiple Option Observation System for
Experimental Studies. In: U.S. DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION (ed.).
*THERRIEN, W. J., TAYLOR, J. C., WATT, S. & KALDENBERG, E. R. 2014. Science
Instruction for Students With Emotional and Behavioral Disorders. Remedial and
Special Education, 35, 15-27.
TORGESEN, J. K. & BRYANT, B. R. 1994. Phonological awareness training for reading,
Pro-Ed.
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 2020. 42nd Annual Report to Congress on the
Implementation of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.
UNICEF. 2021. The State of the World's Children 2021: On My Mind - Promoting,
protecting and caring for children's mental health [Online]. New York: UNICEF.
Available: https://www.unicef.org/media/114636/file/SOWC-2021-fullreport-
English.pdf [Accessed 20/08/25].
72
VADASY, P.F. & SANDERS, E. 2007. Sound Partners Plus. Seattle, WA: Washington
Research Institute. Vocabulary development program, Media, PA., Benchmark
School.
VADASY, P. F., WAYNE, S. K., O'CONNOR, R. E., JENKINS, J. R., POOL, K.,
FIREBAUGH, M. & PEYTON, J. A. 2005. Sound partners: a tutoring program in
phonics-based early reading, Longmont, Sopris West.
VAN POORTVLIET, M. 2024. Child mental health and educational attainment:
Longitudinal evidence from the UK. SSM Mental Health, 5.
VAN STEENSEL, F. J., BöGELS, S. M. & PERRIN, S. 2011. Anxiety disorders in children
and adolescents with autistic spectrum disorders: a meta-analysis. Clinical Child
and Family Psychology Review, 14, 302-17.
VAUGHN, S., LEVY, S., COLEMAN, M. & BOS, C. S. 2002. Reading instruction for
students with LD and EBD: A synthesis of observation studies. The Journal of
Special Education, 36, 2-13.
*VILLARREAL, V., CASTRO-VILLARREAL, F., PETERSON, L. S., BEAR, M., CORTES,
D. M. & ESCOBEDO, T. 2023. Meta-Analysis of Proportions of Students Screened
and Identified in Mental Health Multiple-Gate Screening Research. School
Psychology Review, 52, 130-143.
VON DER EMBSE, N. P., PENDERGAST, L. L., KILGUS, S. P. & EKLUND, K. R. 2015.
Evaluating the applied use of a mental health screener: Structural validity of the
Social, Academic, and Emotional Behavior Risk Screener. Psychological
Assessment, 28, 1265-1275.
WALKER, H. M., RAMSEY, E. & GRESHAM, F. 2003. Heading off disruptive behavior:
How early intervention can reduce defiant behavior-and win back teaching time.
American Educator, 6-21.
WANG, M.-T., L. DEGOL, J., AMEMIYA, J., PARR, A. & GUO, J. 2020. Classroom
climate and children's academic and psychological wellbeing: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Developmental Review, 57, 100912.
*WARD, R. J., BRISTOW, S. J., KOVSHOFF, H., CORTESE, S. & KREPPNER, J. 2022.
The Effects of ADHD Teacher Training Programs on Teachers and Pupils: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Journal of Attention Disorders, 26, 225-
244.
73
WATTS, G. W., BRYANT, D.P. & CARROLL, M. L. 2019. Students With Emotional-
Behavioral Disorders as Cross-Age Tutors: A Synthesis of the Literature.
Behavioral Disorders, 44, 131-147.
WEHBY, J. H., LANE, K. L. & FALK, K. B. 2003. Academic instruction for students with
emotional and behavioral disorders. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral
Disorders, 11, 194-197.
WOLERY, M., HOLCOMBE, A., CYBRIWSKY, C., DOYLE, P.M., SCHUSTER, J. W.,
AULT, M. J. & GAST, D. L. 1992. Constant time delay with discrete responses: a
review of effectiveness and demographic, procedural, and methodological
parameters. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 13, 239-66.
WOODWARD, L. J., LU, Z., MORRIS, A. R. & HEALEY, D. M. 2017. Preschool self
regulation predicts later mental health and educational achievement in very
preterm and typically developing children. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 31,
404-422.
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 2024. Mental Health of Adolescents [Online].
Available: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/adolescent-mental-
health [Accessed 20/08/25].
YUEN, M. & WU, L. 2023. Relationship between school connectedness and
psychological well-being in adolescents: A meta-analysis. Current Psychology: A
Journal for Diverse Perspectives on Diverse Psychological Issues.
74
Department
for Education
© Department for Education Copyright 2025
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0,
except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit
nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3.
Where we have identified any third-party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
Reference: RR1549
ISBN: 978-1-83870-699-9
For any enquiries regarding this publication, contact www.gov.uk/contact-dfe.
This document is available for download at www.gov.uk/government/publications.
75
