Department
for Education
Identifying and supporting
children and young people
with cognition and
learning needs: a rapid
evidence review
Research report
September 2025
Authors: Catherine Antalek, Fiona
Dixon, Elisabeth Herbert and Joanna
Kolak - University College London
Government
Social Research
Disclaimer
This research does not constitute an endorsement by the Department for Education of
any of the approaches described. It does not reflect current Government policy, nor does
it indicate future policy direction. Materials, resources, websites, and commercially
developed programmes or products mentioned in this report are included solely because
they were identified and reviewed as part of the rapid evidence assessment. Other tools
or products with similar functions may exist and their absence from this report should not
be interpreted as a reflection of their effectiveness. Reference to specific named or third-
party products and materials should not be seen as an endorsement by either the
authors or the Department for Education of their use, or of any particular company or its
offerings.
1
Contents
Disclaimer
1
List of tables
5
Executive summary
6
Background
6
Approach
6
Key findings
6
Identification
6
Support
7
Conclusions
7
Introduction
8
Aims
10
Methods
12
Identification and assessment of need
14
Executive functioning
20
Identification of literacy difficulties
21
The skills involved in literacy
21
Assessment and identification of literacy difficulties findings
24
Static and dynamic assessment tools
25
Curriculum-based measures
26
Reading fluency and comprehension measures
26
Informal assessment strategies to identify literacy difficulties summary
27
Identifying writing difficulties
27
Identification of numeracy difficulties
28
The skills involved in maths
28
Assessment and identification of numeracy difficulties findings
30
Assessment and screening tools to identify children at-risk for mathematics
difficulties summary
33
Identification and assessment summary
33
Support and intervention
36
Universal support: High quality teaching and classroom support
36
2
Instructional approaches
37
Classroom environment
38
Universal (tier 1) strategies to support pupils with cognition and learning needs
summary
39
Targeted support
39
Role of specialist teachers
39
Literacy support
40
Decoding and phonological awareness
41
Effective early reading support strategies summary
45
Interventions for older learners with word-reading difficulties
45
Strategies to support older learners with word reading difficulties summary
46
Reading fluency
46
Reading fluency support strategies summary
47
Vocabulary support
47
Vocabulary support strategies summary
47
Reading comprehension
47
Effective reading comprehension support strategies summary
50
Morphological awareness
50
Morphological awareness strategies to support reading and writing summary 51
Motivation and self-regulation strategies for literacy
51
Motivational and self-regulation strategies to support literacy summary
53
Numeracy support
53
Mathematics instructional approaches
54
Instructional approaches to support maths summary
56
General maths problem-solving interventions
56
General maths problem-solving interventions summary
57
Word-problem solving interventions
57
Word-problem solving interventions summary
58
Physical activity interventions
58
Support and intervention summary
59
Conclusions
62
Appendices
64
3
Appendix A: Search terms (PICOS criteria)
64
References
68
4
List of tables
Table 1. Number of identified studies informing each strand
12
Table 2. Definitions of identification terms in the educational and clinical context
15
Table 3. Specialists and healthcare providers who may be involved in collaboration
18
Table 4. Definitions of literacy terms
23
Table 5. Definitions of math terms
29
5
Executive summary
Background
According to the SEND Code of Practice (DfE, 2015), cognition and learning difficulties
encompass a wide range of needs, including general and specific learning difficulties.
These difficulties affect various areas of learning including literacy, numeracy, and the
acquisition of subject-specific knowledge and skills and may be linked to underlying
challenges in areas such as memory, reasoning, and processing speed.
This rapid evidence assessment (REA) reviews how mainstream education professionals
can identify and support cognition and learning difficulties in children and young people,
with a focus on both literacy and mathematics.
Approach
The evidence was collected by means of a rapid evidence assessment. A search of the
literature aimed to retrieve key findings for children and young people with cognition and
learning needs aged 0 to 25. The literature search focused on systematic reviews and
meta-analyses evaluating effective tools and strategies for the identification and support
for educational outcomes for children and young people with cognition and learning
needs in mainstream classrooms, as well as reviews evaluating collaborative practices
between families, schools, and healthcare providers or specialists.
Key findings
Identification
Findings highlight that while formal diagnosis should be undertaken by specialists,
teachers are central to early recognition through structured observation, accessible
screening tools, and close collaboration with Special Educational Needs Coordinators
(SENCos), parents, and external professionals. The REA distinguishes between
screening, assessment, and profiling, emphasising the use of multiple data sources,
including classroom observations, family history, and standardised or informal
assessments, to build a holistic picture of each learner's strengths and needs.
In literacy, identification in the primary years often focuses on phonological awareness,
decoding, and early fluency, with whole-class screening tools such as phonics checks
and curriculum-based measures providing useful first-tier information. Older pupils
present more complex identification challenges, as coping strategies, vocabulary gaps,
and motivational factors can mask underlying needs. For mathematics, fewer studies
6
address identification, but recent reviews highlight practical early numeracy screeners for
younger pupils, while older students require assessments that capture both procedural
fluency and conceptual understanding. In both subjects, there is limited evidence on
effective identification in secondary settings compared to primary, reflecting a research
bias towards early intervention.
Support
Support strategies for literacy, maths and general attainment should be systematic,
targeted, and sustained. A main theme that emerged across effective strategies is the
importance of reducing processing load. In literacy, early interventions addressing
phonological awareness, decoding, and fluency are most effective, with older pupils
benefiting from multicomponent approaches that integrate vocabulary, comprehension,
and fluency work. Motivational and self-regulation strategies can enhance outcomes
across age groups. In mathematics, effective approaches include explicit teacher-led
instruction, peer-assisted learning, and technology-based interventions, with visual,
verbal, and physical representations supporting problem-solving and reducing cognitive
load. Long-term interventions generally produce greater gains than short-term
programmes, and cognitive-based strategies appear particularly effective for older
learners.
Across literacy and numeracy, success depends on matching support to the learner's
specific profile, ensuring professional development for teachers, and strengthening
collaboration between schools and specialists. Further high-quality research is needed
on identification and intervention in secondary settings, scalability of effective
programmes, and their application in diverse educational contexts.
Conclusions
There is strong evidence for structured, targeted interventions to support learners with
cognition and learning difficulties, but their success relies on factors such as teacher
expertise, access to suitable tools, interdisciplinary collaboration, and ongoing
professional development. Approaches should be individualised, developmentally
appropriate, and practical for mainstream settings. Further research is needed to
determine how best to deliver these strategies across varied educational contexts and
stages of learning.
7
Introduction
According to the SEND Code of Practice (DfE, 2015), cognition and learning difficulties
encompass a wide range of needs, including general and specific learning difficulties.
General learning difficulties (GLD) refer to challenges that affect multiple areas of
learning and overall cognitive and academic development. These include moderate
(MLD), severe (SLD), and profound and multiple learning difficulties (PMLD). In contrast,
specific learning difficulties (SpLD) refer to difficulties in specific areas of learning despite
average or above-average cognitive ability.
As of 2025, 28.0% of pupils receiving SEN support in England have either moderate
(170,228 pupils) or specific (160,490 pupils) learning difficulties as their primary type of
need (Department for Education, 2025). Moderate learning difficulties are the third most
common type of need among pupils on SEN support (14.4%), after speech, language
and communication needs (SLCN) (25.7%) and social, emotional and mental health
(SEMH) needs (23.6%). Additionally, 12.1% of pupils with an Education, Health and Care
(EHC) plan are identified with a primary need of moderate (34,755 pupils) or specific
(19,064 pupils) learning difficulties. This represents a large proportion of children and
young people with SEND in England requiring additional support for cognition and
learning difficulties.
In England, for pupils with MLD and SpLD as their primary type of need, 92.9% and
97.4% respectively are in mainstream primary and secondary education settings. In
comparison, fewer pupils with SLD (16.0%) and PMLD (19.6%) are educated in
mainstream school settings.
General learning difficulties are typically associated with a more global cognitive delay
across multiple areas of learning. Children and young people with general learning
difficulties may struggle with basic literacy or numeracy skills as well as difficulties with
conceptual understanding or maintaining concentration (e.g., Kelly & Norwich, 2013).
1. MLD explains significant difficulties in learning and understanding new concepts in
comparison with their peers, affecting various areas of cognition, including literacy,
numeracy, and general cognitive skills, such as memory and processing.
2. SLD explains significant and complex learning needs affecting various areas,
including communication, understanding, and the ability to learn new skills.
Substantial support is required in school and other settings to help achieve their
potential.
3. PMLD is used to describe severe and complex learning difficulties as well as a
physical disability or sensory impairment.
On the other hand, SpLDs refer to difficulties in more specific areas of learning. Some
common SpLDs include dyslexia (reading difficulties), dyscalculia (maths difficulties), and
8
dyspraxia (motor coordination difficulties). Although dyspraxia is considered a SpLD,
given its links with motor coordination, we have chosen to address the identification and
support of dyspraxia in our Sensory and/or Physical Needs Report. Dysgraphia, or
difficulties in writing, has also been proposed as an SpLD. However, the benefit of
dysgraphia as an additional category has been debated, and research shows that there
is an extremely high rate of co-occurrence between dyslexia and writing difficulties
(Döhla, Willmes, & Heim, 2018). Therefore, this current REA will not address dysgraphia
as a separate category but considers writing difficulties within the wider discussion of
identification and support strategies.
Dyslexia is defined as a set of processing difficulties that affect the acquisition of reading
and spelling and affects between 5-10% of the population (Carroll et al., 2025). Dyslexia
has significant heritability (Snowling & Melby-Lervåg, 2016) and difficulties associated
with dyslexia may persist into adulthood (Maughan et al., 2009). The most common
difficulty observed in dyslexia is a difficulty in phonological processing (i.e., phonological
awareness, phonological processing speed or phonological memory). Dyslexia does not
have a single cause; rather, it arises from a combination of genetic, cognitive, and
environmental factors, including oral language development, quality of instruction,
cognitive processes, and genetic influences (Carroll et al., 2016). As a result, children
and young people with dyslexia can present with widely varying profiles of strengths and
needs and severity of those needs. Working memory (maintaining and manipulating
information in active attention), processing speed (ability to perform cognitive tasks
quickly, accurately, and fluently) and orthographic skills (ability to recognise and recall
the visual patterns of written language) can contribute to the impact of dyslexia.
Historically, dyslexia had been identified based on a significant gap, or discrepancy,
between a child's general underlying ability (usually measured through IQ tests) and their
reading achievement. However, there is no consistent evidence that children and young
people with SpLD have underlying abilities below the average range (Norbury et al.,
2017; Stanovich & Siegel, 1994; Tanaka et al., 2011). In other words, literacy difficulties
associated with SpLD are generally not caused by low intelligence, and dyslexia can
occur across a range of intellectual abilities.
Dyscalculia is defined as a persistent difficulty learning and applying mathematical facts
and procedures despite otherwise typical range of general cognitive abilities and
educational experiences (Landerl et al., 2004; Schwenk et al., 2017). These difficulties
include quantity estimation, reduced estimation size, inaccurate mapping of different
number representations, little understanding of the place-value system (e.g., 3, 13, 30,
33), problems understanding procedures and concepts, and decomposing problems into
simpler ones (Cragg et al., 2017; Hawes et al., 2019). Similar to dyslexia, studies with
twins indicate that there may be genetic factors accounting for dyscalculia (Kovas et al.,
2007; Shalev & Von Aster, 2008). Dyscalculia is estimated to affect approximately 3-7 %
of the population, with UK estimates often cited at around 6 % (British Dyslexia
9
Association, n.d.). Dyscalculia often co-occurs with other SpLDs, such as dyslexia, as
well as Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) (20-60%), but can also occur in
isolation (Landerl & Moll, 2010; Morsanyi et al., 2018). Many researchers argue that the
underlying challenge for children and young people with dyscalculia is a specific
weakness in numerical processing, demonstrated by slow and error-prone responses to
basic tasks such as saying which number or quantity is larger (Butterworth, 2010). Others
argue that working memory deficits, particularly in visuo-spatial working memory, are
core to the disorder (David, 2012) or highlight deficits in information processing speed
(Willburger et al., 2008). It is likely that multiple underlying difficulties may be relevant. As
with other SpLDs, there is evidence of significant co-occurrence with other SpLDs as well
as ADHD and autism (Willcutt et al., 2013).
Current understanding recognises that SpLDs often co-occur with other difficulties like
ADHD, autism or with difficulties such as motor coordination or oral language. It is also
important to note that children and young people may have persistent literacy or
mathematics difficulties who do not meet the diagnostic criteria for a GLD or SpLD. The
following sections are therefore organised by area of need or difficulty rather than by
discrete categories to include a broader range of children and young people with
persistent difficulties in learning.
Aims
The goal of this rapid evidence assessment (REA) is to synthesise evidence-based
strategies in the identification, support, and collaborative practices available to
mainstream educators in supporting children and young people with cognition and
learning difficulties. This goal is guided by the following research questions;
Identification:
Which formal and informal methods and measurement tools are available to
practitioners to identify children and young people with cognition and learning
difficulties within diverse classroom settings?
For which ages or age ranges can these tools be used?
What are the performance parameters of these measurement tools (e.g.,
reliability/validity/specificity)?
How can these tools be used to guide decisions regarding the provision of
universal, targeted or specialist support?
10
Support:
What are the most effective universal and targeted strategies, approaches, or
adaptations for supporting children and young people with cognition and learning
difficulties to improve educational outcomes?
What is the most appropriate level of delivery (universal or targeted or
specialist) for each of these interventions?
What specific age groups are targeted by these interventions?
What types of approaches/interventions do children and young people with
cognition and learning difficulties respond best to?
Working with others:
What components and characteristics foster effective collaboration between
teachers, specialists, and parents/caregivers in the identification and support for
children and young people with cognition and learning difficulties, and how can
clear role boundaries and knowledge-sharing frameworks support this process?
What examples are there of different models of collaboration between the
multidisciplinary team?
11
Methods
To address these research questions, a Rapid Evidence Assessment (REA) was
conducted following Cochrane rapid review guidance (Garritty et al., 2024). This REA
followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis
(PRISMA) statement when selecting relevant articles.
We conducted a targeted search in October 2024 of two academic databases (i.e.,
Scopus: PsychINFO and EBSCO: ERIC) as well as grey literature using specific
keywords related to the research questions (see Appendix A: Search terms). We
identified systematic reviews and meta-analyses published in English between 2014 and
2024, focusing on children and young people aged 0-25 with identified cognition and
learning needs in mainstream educational settings. Included studies evaluated
identification, support, or collaborative practices that are feasible in UK classrooms,
excluding medical, home-based, or highly resource-dependent interventions (e.g.,
beyond what is typically available in a mainstream classroom such as animals, robotics
and virtual reality). Identification tools had to be usable by mainstream staff (not
clinicians), and SEND status were independently verified through diagnosis, EHC plan, or
standardised measures. Studies relying solely on teacher judgement or reporting only
behavioural, emotional, physical, or motivational outcomes were excluded. Only studies
reporting measurable educational attainment outcomes were included.
Titles and abstracts were initially screened for relevance by trained members of the team,
followed by full-text review, resulting in the inclusion of 62 studies in the final review, with
8 studies on identification and assessment, and 54 studies on support and intervention
(see Table 1). Given the central role of collaboration across both the identification and
intervention processes, this strand is not presented as a standalone section. Instead,
within the identification and support sections, we highlight where collaborative practices
are necessary and effective. Additionally, as many studies identified for inclusion relate to
collaborative practices in general SEND provision or across different areas of need, a
breakdown of studies specific to cognition and learning is not included here, with
collaborative practices across the categories of SEND addressed in the Cross-Cutting
Themes Report.
Table 1. Number of identified studies informing each strand
Strands
Number of studies included
Identification and assessment
8
Support and intervention
54
Total
62
12
Data from each study were then extracted by trained members of the team. We extracted
descriptive information regarding the characteristics of each study as well as information
about identification tools and support strategies from the included paper(s) where
available.
Our search efforts prioritised high-quality and relevant research, ensuring the inclusion of
peer-reviewed studies and robust methodologies. All studies identified in the final sample
are either systematic reviews or meta-analyses. To evaluate the quality of these studies,
we used the Assessing the Methodology Quality of Systematic Reviews tool 2
(AMSTAR2) (Shea et al., 2017). Findings suggest that the evidence base is mixed
according to this tool. Most studies were rated as high or moderate confidence in the
results, with some rated as low due to a 'critical flaw' (detailed in our Technical Report).
The typical critical flaw was that many studies did not conduct a formal risk of bias
assessment using a recognised tool (e.g., ROBINS-I, Cochrane Risk of Bias).
For a full account of our methodology including search terms, inclusion, and exclusion
criteria, PRISMA flow diagram, and extraction variables, and quality appraisal see the
Technical Report.
13
Identification and assessment of need
The aim of this section is to review the studies identified in our search that focused on
identification and assessment strategies suitable for use by mainstream education
professionals in identifying the needs of children and young people with cognition and
learning difficulties.
It is important to emphasise that subject and class teachers are not responsible for the
formal identification or assessment of learners' needs. In line with the SEND Code of
Practice (DfE, 2015), their role is to support the early recognition of students who may be
experiencing difficulties, particularly those affecting educational progress. Therefore, the
approaches identified in this REA are not intended to diagnose any conditions, but they
can help mainstream educators in recognising children and young people's strengths and
challenges to guide decisions about support or to highlight cases where referral for
specialist assessment may be warranted. Where concerns are identified, these should be
discussed with the school's Special Educational Needs Coordinator (SENCo) and the
child's family to determine appropriate next steps, including referral and formal
assessment where necessary. These processes are often involved in the graduated
approach, outlined in the SEND Code of Practice (2015). The graduated approach is a
four-stage process used by schools to identify and respond to SEND. It involves (1)
assessing a child's needs, (2) planning appropriate support, (3) delivering that support,
and (4) reviewing its effectiveness. The class or subject teacher remains responsible for
implementing support, with guidance from the SENCo and, where appropriate, external
specialists. It is primarily used for pupils receiving SEN support (those without an EHC
plan) and aims to ensure that needs are met in a timely and responsive way.
Further, although many screening and assessment tools may be effective at identification
and needs-based assessment, these tools should be interpreted with caution by
mainstream educators without specialist qualifications. This is because many screening
tools and assessments are founded on psychometric principles (e.g., reliability, validity,
and standardisation) which determine how the results should be interpreted and used.
Without specific training in these areas, it may be difficult to interpret how scores
compare to typically developing populations or whether they represent meaningful results
or what it means when scores fall within clinical ranges. In practice, this ambiguity places
greater reliance on professional judgement, which can lead to variability in how results
are interpreted, dependent on level of training and or experience with complex learning
profiles or co-occurring difficulties. While educators play a vital role in completing these
tools as informants, accurate interpretation should typically be assisted by an individual
with specialist training. While the strategies detailed in this REA can be useful for
intervention planning or flagging potential issues, they should not be used for labelling or
identifying specific personality traits or diagnosis. Rather these tools should be used to
identify critical areas of need that may impact a student's academic performance.
14
The terms 'identification', 'screening', 'assessment', and 'profiling' are often used
inconsistently across research, policy, and practice and can have different meanings in
relation to educational versus clinical practice. For example, the term 'screening' in an
educational context typically refers to the process by which a tool or a strategy is used to
flag potential needs in a population (e.g., whole-school or whole-class) to inform
provision of timely support or targeted interventions in educational settings. In contrast,
screening for clinical purposes is typically carried out by health or mental health
professionals using standardised tools to determine whether a child meets criteria for a
specific diagnosis, such as dyslexia or dyscalculia, with the goal of planning for further
assessment or clinical treatment. However, some processes can overlap. For example, a
handwriting speed assessment could be used for identification purposes to initially
identify handwriting difficulties, or it could be used in formal assessment of needs (e.g.,
formal diagnostic assessment for dyslexia or dyscalculia) or to monitor progress of a
handwriting intervention. For clarity throughout this document, we define each term within
an educational context. Definitions of terms are provided in Table 2.
Table 2. Definitions of identification terms in the educational and clinical context
Term
Educational use
Clinical use
Needs-based
The process of recognising that a
Not a formal clinical term;
identification
child may have additional
overlaps with early signs that
educational needs (whether they do
may prompt diagnostic
or do not have a diagnosis), often
referral but is not sufficient for
based on parental or child concern,
diagnosis.
observations, or professional
judgement; however, this process
can also include informal
assessments.
Informal assessments are flexible
methods of gathering data to identify
areas of need, guide interventions
and monitor progress. These tools
include checklists, questionnaires,
or more structured assessments
(e.g., handwriting speed, reading
fluency).
15
Term
Educational use
Clinical use
Screening
A brief tool or procedure used to flag
Tools used to determine
or identify potential strengths and
whether further diagnostic
challenges across a population. In
assessment is warranted,
educational contexts, the goal is to
often as a first step in a
flag potential needs early so that
medical or psychological
timely support or targeted
evaluation pathway.
interventions can be put in place
Typically, these tools should
within the school setting. Screeners
meet certain principles and
are not diagnostic tools but
should be administered by a
designed to flag potential risk.
trained specialist (UK Health
However, given that screeners are
Security Agency, 2015).
typically quick to complete and
usually measure only a specific area
of concern, they should be
interpreted with caution.
Assessment
Refers to a systematic structured
A systematic and structured
process of data gathering from
process of data collection for
standardised tools to understand
diagnostic purposes.
individual strengths and needs in
Assessment is conducted by
order to plan intervention or monitor
specialists (e.g., educational
progress. For educational purposes,
psychologists) and involves
these can be informal or formal
standardised diagnostic tools
assessments.
to determine specific
Formal assessments are structured,
conditions or development
standardised tools used to evaluate
profiles
a student's performance against
national or normative standards.
These include GCSEs and A-levels
but also standardised assessments
of literacy or other types of skills.
Formal assessments sometimes
require input from specialists to
administer and/or interpret results.
Formal assessment may result in a
diagnosis or eligibility for additional
provision such as exam access
arrangements.
16
Term
Educational use
Clinical use
Profiling
A holistic summary of a child's
Less commonly used as a
functioning, strengths, and areas of
standalone concept;
difficulty, often used to guide
elements of profiling are
provision. Includes data from
embedded in comprehensive
multiple informants and through
diagnostic assessments that
multiple methods.
explore functional impact
across domains.
Cognition and learning difficulties affect areas of cognitive and academic development
(e.g., working memory, literacy, maths, writing) which are also common areas to measure
in the identification and assessment process. However, other areas such as motivation,
behaviour, and social-emotional skills may also affect academic performance and
therefore can be useful to measure. In a review of the literature, Carroll (2017)
recommends that identification and assessment of cognition and learning difficulties
should address a range of these different areas, as focusing on just one area is not
sufficient in understanding a child's needs. Both strengths and challenges should be
measured so that any strengths can be leveraged in targeted support. This should also
be supported by information from multiple sources, including the child themselves, their
families, and multiple forms of data collection such as observations and standardised
assessments.
Specific learning difficulties such as dyslexia and dyscalculia can be formally assessed
and diagnosed by specialist dyslexia and dyscalculia assessors, educational
psychologists, or sometimes by clinical psychologists or paediatricians. General learning
difficulties may also be more formally assessed by an educational psychologist, but these
profiles are not often diagnosed in part due to the difficulty in defining these difficulties.
However, given the significant rate of co-occurring difficulties, it may also be important to
refer to a multi-disciplinary team, who could also assess for commonly co-occurring
conditions such as ADHD or Developmental Language Disorder (DLD). Further,
identification and assessment of SpLDs should rule out difficulties that may have resulted
from visual or hearing difficulties. Therefore, regular vision and hearing tests can be
important in both the diagnosis and in the identification of educational needs. Here, there
are a number of specialists and healthcare professionals who may be involved in the
identification and support processes for children and young people with cognition and
learning difficulties. These professionals are listed in Table 3.
17
Table 3. Specialists and healthcare providers who may be involved in collaboration
Specialist
Role
Audiologist
Conducts hearing assessments. Diagnoses hearing loss
and recommends hearing aids or other devices.
Ear, Nose and Throat
Investigates medical causes of hearing issues May
(ENT) Specialist
recommend surgery or further medical treatment.
Ophthalmologist
Diagnoses vision impairments and prescribes treatments
or corrective lenses.
Optometrist
Performs vision tests and prescribes glasses. Identifies
functional vision issues.
Orthoptist
Assesses and treats eye movement and coordination
issues.
Paediatrician
Coordinates assessment of complex developmental or
physical needs. Screens for conditions like cerebral palsy,
muscular dystrophy, or global developmental delay.
Physiotherapist
Assesses movement, posture, and muscle function.
Designs physical therapy programmes to support mobility
and motor development.
Occupational Therapist
Assesses fine motor skills such as writing, daily living
(OT)
skills, and sensory processing. Recommends adaptations
to support functional independence.
Neurologist
Assesses neurological causes of physical or sensory
difficulties
Specialist teacher/
A specialist teacher can formally assess and diagnose
specialist assessor
SpLDs and can plan and implement interventions.
Speech and Language
May be involved where speech or language production or
Therapist (SaLT)
comprehension affects areas of learning.
Clinical Psychologist /
Conducts cognitive and functional assessments and can
Educational Psychologist
provide diagnosis of GLDs, SpLDs or common co-
occurring difficulties
Specialist Nurses (e.g.,
Provide health monitoring, care planning, and parent
Community Children's
support for long-term conditions.
Nurses, Epilepsy Nurse)
Navigating these multiple pathways of diagnosis and coordinating with multiple
healthcare professionals or specialists can be challenging, especially for families and
children and young people. While a formal dyslexia or dyscalculia assessment can be
18
useful to plan support and intervention strategies, it is important to highlight that a
diagnosis is not always necessary to support children and young people with cognition
and learning difficulties. Literacy, numeracy, and general learning difficulties can and
should be identified and supported without formal diagnosis through needs-based
identification or the graduated approach as outlined in the SEND Code of Practice (DfE,
2015). There are a number of approaches that educators can use to identify different
areas of difficulty such as literacy (including reading, spelling, and writing) and numeracy.
This report will discuss evidence according to these different areas of need. However,
here we note a few general practices that educators should keep in mind when
identifying, screening, and assessing for cognition and learning difficulties.
Firstly, teachers, early years practitioners, and SENCos should have a foundational
understanding of cognition and learning difficulties. Given the limited instruction on these
difficulties in initial teacher training programmes, it may be beneficial for educators to
engage in ongoing professional development to strengthen their knowledge and skills in
identifying and supporting children and young people with cognition and learning needs.
Second, obtaining a family history and background information is important in the
identification, assessment, and profiling process. Given that a SpLD can be heritable and
is impacted by environmental factors (e.g., access to high quality oral language or texts),
it is useful, where possible, to obtain a detailed family history of SpLD diagnoses. There
is a familial risk factor that contributes to dyslexia (Snowling et al., 2003; Van Bergen et
al., 2014). Further, families with lower literacy levels or experiencing material poverty
may offer fewer opportunities for reading and access to books at home, which may
negatively impact the literacy skills of a child. Therefore, it can be useful to ask about the
home literacy environment to gain an overall idea of a child's learning opportunities.
Oral language is also a strong predictor of literacy outcomes (Snowling & Melby-Lervag,
2016). If a child or young person has any identified speech, language, and
communication difficulties, they may be more likely to have a SpLD (Botting et al., 2006;
Snowling, Bishop, & Stothard, 2000). Children and young people who speak two
languages or have English as an Additional Language (EAL) may also have unique
profiles due to the exposure they have to two or more languages (and oral language can
be impacted by the number of languages children speak) (Dixon et al., 2020). It is also
useful to know whether the child or young person may have any co-occurring difficulties
that could be impacting their academic performance, such as motor difficulties,
handwriting difficulties, ADHD, or autism.
Finally, the cognition and learning profile of children and young people can change over
time (e.g., in response to intervention, change in environment, cognitive development,
and other relevant changes). Therefore, it is important that early identification is followed
by monitoring and periodic reassessment as highlighted in the review by Carroll (2017).
Most standardised assessments can typically be readministered every six months, but
19
weekly or monthly informal assessments may also be useful. These will be discussed in
the following sections.
Executive functioning
In our Cross-Cutting Themes Report, we discuss executive functioning in more detail,
including how executive functioning affects the learning and academic performance of
children and young people with different types of SEND. However, it is also important to
include a brief discussion of executive functioning within this cognition and learning REA,
given its substantial influence on the underlying difficulties experienced by children and
young people across a range of cognition and learning difficulties.
Executive functions refer to a set of cognitive skills such as attention, planning, inhibition,
and memory processes including working memory. Working memory is the ability to
temporarily hold and manipulate information in the mind (Baddeley, 2020) and is required
for many everyday tasks. For example, when reading, one must remember each word
that was just read and hold it in memory to finish the sentence or the paragraph so that
meaning can be synthesised. This also involves drawing from other cognitive resources
such as attention and inhibiting other distractions.
These cognitive resources, including working memory, are limited in capacity and can be
overloaded (sometimes referred to as cognitive load) with the presentation of multiple
sources of information (including verbal and visual information) (Just & Carpenter, 1992).
For example, a busy classroom can present multiple forms of information (e.g.,
background noise, teachers' verbal instructions, notes on the blackboard) which can
overload working memory capacity, making it challenging for children and young people
to selectively attend to and maintain attention on tasks. Similarly, if too much information
is presented at once, children and young people may struggle to process it all, affecting
the quality of learning.
Children and young people with SpLD and other types of learning difficulties generally
have challenges with working memory processing (David, 2012; Gathercole et al., 2016;
Peng & Fuchs, 2016), attention, inhibition, and other cognitive processes. These
additional challenges increase cognitive load, resulting in further difficulties in learning.
Therefore, support and intervention techniques that reduce cognitive load and reduce the
requirement of working memory tend to be effective for this population.
While executive functioning and other types of cognitive processes are typically assessed
by a qualified dyslexia assessor or an educational psychologist, there may be specific
indicators that a child or young person has difficulties with executive functioning. Children
and young people may appear inattentive, have difficulty following multi-step instructions,
planning, and organising tasks or physical materials, or struggle to manage their time.
20
Educators working with children can observe these behaviours and record them to inform
intervention planning or contribute to the assessment process.
While there are interventions and support programmes that target and train working
memory, it is important to note that there is limited evidence that training working memory
is an effective strategy in improving educational outcomes (Melby-Lervåg & Hulme, 2013;
Melby-Lervåg et al., 2016). Findings typically show gains on the specific tasks used
during training, but these improvements rarely generalise to broader areas of learning or
cognitive function. It may be more effective to reduce the cognitive load these processes
impose on children during reading tasks (e.g., Sweller, 2011). For example, breaking
down instructions into smaller, manageable chunks, repetition of information or
instructions, or oral rehearsal. Therefore, while assessing these cognitive skills can
inform a child's overall reading profile, they may not show improvement with targeted
reading interventions.
Identification of literacy difficulties
Many children and young people with SEND will have difficulties with literacy skills
including reading, spelling, and writing. Children and young people with dyslexia may
have difficulties with speed of processing and word reading difficulties but may also
struggle with wider literacy skills including reading comprehension, fluency, spelling, and
writing. Children with MLD, SLD, or PMLD may also have a number of these same
challenges in literacy. It is important to identify whether a child is struggling in any of
these areas to initiate early intervention and support (Hall & Burns, 2018). This section
first outlines the key skills involved in literacy development, to clarify which areas should
be considered in identification and assessment processes for recognising difficulties and
planning appropriate interventions. We then discuss different tools and techniques
available to mainstream educators in identifying and assessing literacy difficulties.
The skills involved in literacy
It is widely agreed that the goal of reading is to comprehend a text; however, accurate
and fluent word reading are necessary foundational skills for comprehension (Perfetti,
1985). The Simple View of Reading (SVR; Hoover & Gough, 1990) provides a valuable
framework for understanding two essential components of reading comprehension: word
reading (decoding) and language comprehension. Hoover and Gough (1990) defined
decoding as being able to recognise words quickly and accurately, and language
comprehension as the ability to understand the meaning of words and sentences when
read or heard. Both decoding and language comprehension are equally important for
successful reading comprehension and difficulties in either or both components may
result in comprehension struggles. Therefore, when identifying literacy difficulties, it can
21
be a useful starting point to determine whether a child has difficulty in decoding,
language comprehension, or both.
The SVR model has been widely supported in research and is effective in predicting
reading comprehension and explaining variability among readers (Catts et al., 2015;
Kirby & Savage, 2008; Tilstra et al., 2009). Definitions of dyslexia and developmental
language disorder similarly highlight the importance of these skills in reading
development and in identifying and supporting reading difficulties. Based on this, the
SVR provides a strong foundation for determining which reading skills should be
measured when identifying difficulties and monitoring interventions.
Research has indicated that decoding and language comprehension rely on distinct
underlying processes, often conceptualised by Scarborough's reading rope
(Scarborough, 2001). For example, language comprehension relies on skills such as
vocabulary knowledge, verbal reasoning, and background knowledge, among others.
Decoding relies on knowledge of the alphabetic principle and phonological awareness
and can also be supported by sight recognition. Proficiency in either component exists
along a continuum, varying widely among individual learners. Children and young people
with cognition and learning difficulties may struggle with any number of these skills, which
may in turn result in literacy difficulties. For example, children and young people with
dyslexia often struggle with decoding, phonics, and aspects of working memory and
processing speed (Carroll et al., 2024). Although dyslexia is primarily associated with
difficulties in decoding, literacy skills are highly interconnected, meaning that weaknesses
in one area, such as phonological processing, can also impact others, including reading
comprehension. As a result, children with dyslexia may also exhibit difficulties in
understanding what they read, especially as texts become more complex.
Conversely, some children, including those with Developmental Language Disorder, may
decode words accurately but still struggle with reading comprehension due to challenges
with language processing, working memory, or inferencing skills (e.g., Bishop &
Snowling, 2004). These underlying language and reading skills are also linked to other
areas of literacy including writing (e.g., Berninger & Amtmann, 2003) and spelling
(Kohnen et al. 2009). These overlapping difficulties highlight the importance of assessing
the full range of reading skills when identifying and supporting learners with literacy
needs. Definitions for each of these different literacy skills are provided in Table 4.
22
Table 4. Definitions of literacy terms
Skill
Definition
Phonological
The broad ability to recognise and manipulate sounds in
awareness
spoken language, including words, syllables, rhymes, and
phonemes.
Phonics
Understanding the relationship between sounds and the
letters that represent them.
Decoding
Using knowledge of phonics to translate written words into
their spoken forms.
Word identification
The ability to sound out a word.
Reading fluency
Reading with speed, accuracy, and proper expression
(intonation and rhythm).
Reading accuracy
The ability to recognise and pronounce words correctly.
Vocabulary
Knowing the meaning of a wide range of words and the
ability to understand them in context.
Morphological
Understanding of how words are structured and how their
awareness
meaning is built from smaller units called morphemes. A
morpheme is the smallest unit of meaning in a language. For
example, in the word "unhappiness", there are three
morphemes: "un-" (a prefix meaning not), "happy" (a root
meaning pleased), and "-ness" (a suffix indicating a state or
quality).
Reading
Understanding, interpreting, and drawing meaning from texts.
comprehension
Oral language
The ability to understand and use spoken language, which
supports reading development.
Working memory
The capacity to hold and manipulate information while
reading and processing text.
Visual processing
The ability to interpret and make sense of what is seen (e.g.,
recognising letters and words).
Motivation/Engagement
The interest and willingness to read, which influences the
development of reading skills over time.
These literacy skills are often strong early predictors of later literacy outcomes. For
example, early difficulties in phonological awareness, fluency, and decoding appear to be
the most consistent predictors of initial response to intervention (Al Otaiba & Fuchs,
2002; Lam & McMaster, 2014). Therefore, these different areas are often important to
23
measure and assess in order to guide support and targeted intervention. In addition to
these language and reading skills, executive functions such as working memory,
attention, and inhibition can impact reading performance. Reading motivation and
attitudes are also key predictors of literacy performance (Breadmore et al., 2019). The
relative strengths and challenges in each of these domains may be different for each
learner; therefore, interventions should be guided by the profile of need rather than just
targeting a narrow range of skills.
Assessment and identification of literacy difficulties findings
There are several types of literacy assessments in terms of their design, how they are
scored, and how they are interpreted. Each type typically serves a different purpose. For
example, norm-referenced tests compare a student's performance to that of a
representative sample, known as the "norm group", to determine how a student ranks
relative to their peers. In contrast, criterion-referenced tests assess whether a student
has mastered specific concepts or can apply particular methods or approaches. National
assessments in the UK are typically criterion-referenced tests that judge whether a
student has met the expected level for their age. Finally, curriculum-based assessments
are informal, teacher-led assessments that measure a student's progress aligned with
the setting's curriculum. All these assessments, along with other types of data collection
(e.g., family history or observations, etc.) can help identify areas of strength and need,
inform instructional planning, and support decisions about a student's placement within a
reading programme.
While our REA search resulted in few standardised tools available to mainstream
educators without specialist qualifications, there are still a number of strategies they can
employ to aid in the identification and monitoring of literacy difficulties. Given the broad
range of skills involved, including oral language, phonological awareness, decoding,
fluency, vocabulary, executive functioning, and comprehension, as well as the influence
of genetic and environmental factors, it can be challenging to identify literacy difficulties
across a whole class. To manage this complexity, educators may want to adopt a
structured, tiered approach to identification that is purposeful, manageable, and aligned
with observed classroom behaviours and learning progress. This allows for early and
responsive identification of need to support timely intervention and ensures that decisions
are based on evidence gathered over time rather than isolated assessments or
assumptions. This strategy should be planned with the school's SENCo or other senior
leaders for consistency and manageability.
High-quality teaching should always be the top priority when addressing literacy needs in
the classroom. If a student continues to struggle despite receiving strong universal
instruction, this may indicate the need for further investigation into their individual
learning needs. A good starting point is to conduct general observations or broad
24
screening using tools such as curriculum-based assessments, phonics screeners, or
sentence reading tests. The Year 1 phonics screener can be a useful early measure of
difficulties in the foundational skills needed for reading. Additionally, national
assessments can also be a useful benchmark for further investigation of academic need.
Schools could also incorporate open communication channels for families to share any
early concerns about their child's literacy or academic difficulties.
Next, students flagged by initial screening, observations, or parent and caregiver
concerns, can be given more targeted assessments focussed on specific components
(e.g., reading fluency and comprehension). If difficulties are identified, this is an
appropriate stage to also gather a developmental history and explore any family history
of SEND or related learning difficulties. As previously discussed, it is useful to measure a
number of different literacy skills to understand specific strengths and challenges for
different learners.
Static and dynamic assessment tools
Identifying and assessing early literacy skills can be challenging due to the recent
acquisition of these skills and the rapid pace of reading development during the first few
years of school. Word reading and decoding can be measured in various ways.
Standardised word reading tests assess a child's ability to read individual words aloud.
They often use lists of both real words and pseudowords (i.e., nonsense words), with
pseudoword reading specifically testing decoding skills (see García & Cain, 2014). These
assessments are typically static, meaning they measure a child's current ability.
However, two systematic reviews identified from our search (Dixon et al., 2023; Nelson-
Strouts et al., 2020) also suggest that dynamic assessment tools, which evaluate a
child's learning potential rather than only their current ability, are also supported by
emerging evidence of effectiveness in identifying performance on oral reading fluency,
word identification, phonological awareness tasks, and reading difficulties of younger
children (e.g., aged 8 and younger). The combination of both dynamic and traditional
standardised assessment tools yielded the most accurate results in predicting reading
difficulties, though dynamic assessment was superior to static standardised tools in some
cases (e.g., early in literacy development before age 7, where static tests lack sensitivity
(e.g., floor effects), and in lower-performing, at-risk, or preliterate groups). Based on this,
educators may want to consider using both types of assessments when investigating
reading difficulties. However, research on dynamic assessment is still limited. There is
still a lack of clear-cut points or consistent guidelines for interpreting scores in most
dynamic assessments of early literacy which presents several challenges. Without
standardised cut off points, it becomes difficult for educators and practitioners to
determine whether a child's performance indicates a significant concern, falls within
typical development, or shows advanced progress. This limits the usefulness of dynamic
25
assessment for consistent screening, monitoring, or intervention planning across different
educational settings.
Curriculum-based measures
Curriculum-based measures are designed to be an assessment that a teacher can create
using the same curricular materials being used for instruction (Deno, 2014). Teachers
can use material sampled from their lessons to measure reading skills. In the classroom,
curriculum-based measures are usually timed such as timed readings (which measure
fluency and accuracy) or short comprehension quizzes that do not involve prompting.
These strategies can help identify readers who may need extra support and monitor
progress over time. These strategies can help provide a general picture of which
students may be struggling.
One systematic review identified in our REA (Snyder & Ayres, 2020) found curriculum-
based measures to be effective in measuring reading comprehension, fluency, and
accuracy. Oral reading fluency was the most commonly used measure where children
were either asked to read short texts within a given time frame or to read words or
nonsense words. Letter sound fluency was also tested by measuring how quickly
students can produce the sound of a given letter. Additionally, reading comprehension
was measured using a maze task where students were asked to choose the correct word
to complete sentences in a passage with missing words. A few commercially available
measures were also investigated in this study including the DIBELS (Dynamic Indicators
of Basic Early Literacy Skills), easyCBM, and the aimsWeb. While these tools were
included in the analysis, the review did not evaluate or compare their relative
effectiveness. As a result, it is not possible to determine which tools included in the study
produced the most reliable or impactful outcomes. Selection should therefore be based
on factors such as alignment with curriculum goals, ease of administration, training
requirements, and how well the tool fits the specific needs of the student population.
Reading fluency and comprehension measures
Indeed, oral reading can be another good starting point in identifying difficulties in various
reading skills such as reading accuracy, reading fluency, prosody (i.e., the patterns of
stress and intonation) and expression. However, caution is needed when asking students
to read aloud especially in classroom settings. Some whole-class reading aloud methods
can be detrimental, potentially causing anxiety or embarrassment, particularly for
students with literacy difficulties. One-to-one options or paired reading strategies may be
a better option to reduce these detrimental effects (e.g., Ash et al., 2008). Teachers can
then prioritise key areas, such as decoding and comprehension, as a starting point,
particularly for early readers or those new to English.
Reading comprehension is commonly measured using standardised reading
comprehension tests, which assess a reader's current ability to understand written text
26
through questions that require literal, inferential, and evaluative comprehension (e.g.,
passages followed by multiple-choice or open-ended questions). Another method is cloze
procedures, a reading comprehension activity where words are removed from a passage,
and the reader is asked to fill in the blanks, testing their ability to understand context and
meaning (Bormuth, 1968). Additionally, retelling and summarisation tasks can measure
comprehension, asking students to summarise or retell a passage in their own words to
assess how well they grasped the overall meaning and key details (Paris & Paris, 2003).
Lastly, comprehension monitoring evaluates a student's ability to detect and resolve
misunderstandings as they read, often by introducing deliberate inconsistencies into the
text (Pressley & Gaskins, 2006).
One systematic review (Guo et al., 2023) identified two tools for assessing reading
comprehension in pupils aged 5-18: the Neale Analysis of Reading Ability (NARA; Neale,
1989, 1997) and the Woodcock Reading Mastery Tests (WRMT; Woodcock, 1987). Both
require pupils to read passages; in the WRMT, pupils complete a cloze test while
reading, whereas in the NARA, pupils read aloud short stories and then answer
comprehension questions. The WRMT is more clinically oriented and requires moderate
training, while the NARA can be administered by teachers, although results should be
interpreted with input from a trained assessor or SENCo.
Informal assessment strategies to identify literacy difficulties summary
Real word reading and nonsense word reading for decoding
Oral text reading accuracy
Oral text reading fluency
Running records with miscue analysis
Listening comprehension
Reading comprehension
Identifying writing difficulties
Writing is a complex activity that involves not only the physical motor process of
handwriting or typing, but also spelling, sentence structure, syntax, grammar, content
knowledge, vocabulary, punctuation, among others. The writing process also involves
executive functioning such as planning, revising, and working memory. Difficulty with any
of these aspects of writing, may impact on the ability to carry out the others (Berninger &
Amtmann, 2003). For example, a child who struggles with spelling, may write less, and
use less diverse vocabulary, more pausing and hesitation, which can affect overall quality
of the written work (Sumner et al., 2013; 2014; 2016; 2020).
27
It is useful to take an unaided writing sample from a child to assess writing skills. Writing
outcomes can be measured in terms of their product and process. Although, instruction
requires emphasis on the writing process (planning and organising material, transcribing
thoughts into words, and reviewing and revising), assessment of writing skills must focus
primarily on the writing product (legibility, number of words written, vocabulary use,
syntax, grammar, spelling etc). Identification and assessment of handwriting difficulties
are discussed in more detail in the Cross-Cutting Themes Report of this series of REAs
and therefore will not be repeated here.
Identification of numeracy difficulties
The skills involved in maths
Similar to literacy, there are also many skills involved in mathematics which may also be
measured to understand a children or young person's profile of strengths and challenges.
Mathematics achievement is shaped by a complex interplay of factors, including
individual differences in attitudes, motivation, language ability, as well as broader social
and educational influences. While these general factors are important, domain-specific
numerical skills such as understanding number sets and retrieving basic arithmetic facts
are also important for success in mathematics. Students with learning difficulties in
mathematics often show persistent difficulties in these specific areas, including difficulties
with number processing, counting knowledge, and basic fact retrieval (Geary, Hoard, &
Bailey, 2012). These challenges are not merely a result of limited working memory;
research shows that children with MLD struggle to form and retrieve long-term memory
representations of arithmetic facts, and often make more frequent and atypical errors
when doing so (Andersson, 2008, 2010; Mazzocco et al., 2008). In addition to fact
retrieval, children with MLD also experience delays in developing arithmetic procedures.
While many eventually learn basic strategies, they typically lag behind their typically
achieving peers by one or more years, especially on tasks with greater procedural
complexity (Andersson, 2010). Notably, children with low achievement in maths show
retrieval and procedural skills that are intermediate between those of children with MLD
and their typically achieving peers and tend to become more similar to typically achieving
children over time (Chong & Siegel, 2008). Furthermore, students with maths difficulties
often demonstrate weaker reading skills compared to typically developing readers
(Geary, 1993; Jordan et al., 2003), highlighting the interconnectedness of learning
difficulties across domains. Definitions of different maths skills are provided in Table 5.
28
Table 5. Definitions of math terms
Skill
Definition
Number sense
An understanding of numbers, their magnitude, relationships,
and how they are affected by operations. Includes the ability
to estimate, subitise, and compare quantities.
Counting principles
Understanding how to count accurately, including stable
order, one-to-one correspondence, cardinality, and order
irrelevance.
Symbolic number
Recognising and understanding the meaning of numerals
knowledge
and number words (e.g., knowing that "5" represents five
objects).
Arithmetic fluency
The ability to carry out basic calculations (addition,
subtraction, multiplication, division) quickly and accurately.
Measurement
Understanding units of measurement, converting between
units, and applying measurement in practical situations
Calculation strategies
Applying appropriate strategies (e.g., counting on, using
known facts, breaking numbers apart) to solve arithmetic
problems.
Place value
Recognising the value of digits depending on their position in
understanding
a number (e.g., understanding that the 3 in 34 represents
30).
Mathematical
The ability to explain and justify mathematical thinking, make
reasoning
inferences, and evaluate the validity of arguments or
solutions.
Problem solving
Applying mathematical knowledge to unfamiliar situations,
selecting relevant information, and using strategies to find
solutions.
Spatial reasoning
Understanding shapes, positions, directions, and spatial
relationships; essential for geometry and visualising
mathematical concepts.
Working memory
Holding and manipulating information while performing
calculations or following multi-step problem-solving tasks.
Visual processing
Interpreting visual information such as symbols, shapes, or
number patterns, often involved in understanding graphs or
diagrams.
29
Skill
Definition
Motivation/Engagement
Interest, confidence, and persistence in learning
mathematics, which influence the development and
application of skills over time.
Assessment and identification of numeracy difficulties findings
Our REA did not retrieve any studies that investigated the identification and assessment
of maths and numeracy difficulties. However, we are aware of one systematic review
published after we undertook our search which investigates early childhood (aged 0 to 8)
assessment and screening tools to identify children at-risk for mathematics difficulties
(Outhwaite et al., 2024).
This systematic review found six assessment tools and five screeners available to
mainstream schools in the UK that show strong and reliable evidence for effectively
measuring young children's mathematical abilities. These tools have been evaluated
against common psychometric standards, such as reliability, validity, and accuracy, and
have demonstrated good performance across multiple criteria. As a result, they are
considered among the most trustworthy options for identifying children who may be
struggling with, or are at risk of, developing maths learning difficulties. While other tools
were also considered strong in this systematic review, they either were not available in
English, or were diagnostic screening tools or assessments that would need specialist
qualifications to use. Educators should still consider how practical and accessible these
tools and screeners are within their specific classroom contexts. Here, we briefly describe
these six assessment tools:
1. The Early Years Toolbox (Howard & Melhuish, 2017) is a tablet-based
assessment suite developed in Australia for children aged 3 to 6 years. It
measures a range of school readiness skills including early literacy, numeracy,
and executive functioning. It is available in English and was specifically designed
to be user-friendly for educators with minimal training, making it accessible for
classroom use, though it is not standardised for use in the UK.
2. The Early Learning Outcomes Measure (ELOM; Snelling et al., 2019), developed
in South Africa, also targets school readiness in children aged 4 to 6, measuring
numeracy, literacy, and executive functioning. It is available in English and other
languages and can be administered by trained educators or assessors. While it is
primarily used in South Africa, it offers a useful framework for identifying early
difficulties though it is not standardised for use in the UK.
3. The International Development and Early Learning Assessment - Emergent
Numeracy (IDELA; Save the Children, 2019) is a widely used tool for children
30
aged 3 and 6 months to 6 and 6 months, measuring numeracy, literacy, motor,
and socio-emotional development. It is available in English and is designed for use
in low-resource settings, making it accessible to teachers and paraprofessionals
following brief training.
4. The Parent Ratings of Numeracy Skills (Lin et al., 2021), is a researcher-designed
questionnaire for parents, developed for children aged 3 to 6, which captures
parental perceptions of their child's early numeracy ability. Parents were asked to
provide ratings of their children's counting, numeral identification, and arithmetic
abilities. To determine verbal counting abilities, parents were asked, "How high
can your child count?" To determine parent ratings of children's numeral
identification skills, parents were presented with numerals 1 through 15 and asked
to circle all of the numerals that their child could identify. Parents were also asked
to respond "yes" or "no" to the prompt, "My child can calculate simple sums (e.g., 1
plus 1, 1 plus 2)."
5. The Research-Based Early Mathematics Assessment - Short Form (REMA-SF;
Clements et al., 2008; Weiland et al., 2012) assesses number sense, operations,
geometry, and measurement in children aged 3 to 6 years. It is available in
English and can be used by trained researchers or teachers with guidance, though
its design leans more toward research applications.
6. Finally, the Teacher Rating Scale - Early Numeracy (TRS-EN; Vessonen et al.,
2023) is a teacher-completed tool that evaluates early numeracy skills in 4- to 7-
year-olds. It is quick to administer, available in English, and specifically intended
for classroom use, making it a practical option for teachers to screen and monitor
early numeracy development. This scale included 22 items measuring counting
(13 items e.g., 'is able to count forward from 1 to 10 correctly'), numerical
relational (7 items e.g., 'is able to order objects according to a given criteria like
size), and basic arithmetical skills (2 items e.g., 'is able to add and subtract with
numbers below 10 using objects).
The five screeners included:
1. Assessing Student Proficiency of Early Number Sense (ASPENS), developed by
Clarke et al. (2011), is a brief screening tool designed to assess foundational
number sense in early elementary-aged children. It evaluates concepts such as
counting, number recognition, and quantity comparison to help identify students at
risk for mathematics difficulties. It is teacher-administered and intended to guide
early instructional support.
2. House of Numbers (HoN), created by Chatzaki et al. (2024), is a newly developed
assessment tool for exploring symbolic and non-symbolic number sense. It
features engaging, game-like tasks that can identify strengths and weaknesses in
31
numerical understanding and has been piloted with young children in early
education settings. It is worth noting however, that this is still an emerging tool,
and more research may be needed on its usability in school settings without
specialist supervision.
3. Math Essential Skill Screener - Elementary Version (MESS-E), by Erford et al.
(1998), is a teacher- or school-based screener designed to evaluate essential
mathematics skills in primary-aged students. It measures number operations,
computation fluency, and early algebraic reasoning. The MESS-E helps determine
which students may benefit from targeted intervention.
4. Number Sense Screener (NSS) - English Version, developed by Jordan et al.
(2010), is a research-validated screener for identifying number sense difficulties in
early learners (typically aged 5-7). It covers symbolic and non-symbolic tasks,
such as numeral identification, quantity discrimination, and basic arithmetic
fluency, and is suitable for teacher use following brief training.
5. Preschool Early Numeracy Skills Screener - Brief Version (PENS-B), designed by
Purpura et al. (2015), is a quick and reliable tool for preschool teachers to assess
numeracy readiness. It includes tasks such as counting, number comparison, and
understanding number magnitude, providing a practical approach for early
identification of children needing further support.
These tools offer a good starting point for mainstream educators to consider the early
maths and numeracy skills of young children. They may also be useful follow-up tools for
early educational assessments such as the reception baseline assessment to guide
support planning. For assessments and screeners where administration by teachers is
not explicitly detailed, consultation with the specific user manuals may be helpful or
contacting the developers to understand the training requirements and suitability for
teacher administration.
32
Assessment and screening tools to identify children at-risk for mathematics
difficulties summary
The Early Years Toolbox.
The Early Learning Outcomes Measure.
The International Development and Early Learning Assessment - Emergent
Numeracy.
The Parent Ratings of Numeracy Skills
The Research-Based Early Mathematics Assessment - Short Form
The Teacher Rating Scale - Early Numeracy
Assessing Student Proficiency of Early Number Sense (Screener)
House of Numbers (Screener)
Math Essential Skill Screener - Elementary Version
Number Sense Screener
Preschool Early Numeracy Skills Screener - Brief Version
Identification and assessment summary
The identification and assessment section of this REA reviewed evidence on how
mainstream education professionals can identify and assess cognition and learning
difficulties in children and young people. While formal assessment should be carried out
by specialists, teachers play a key role in the early recognition of learning challenges and
in referring pupils for further support. The section highlights that many available
screening and assessment tools require specialist training to interpret correctly due to
their psychometric complexity. However, there are accessible strategies that teachers
can use to observe and monitor student progress and identify potential concerns.
Clear definitions of terms such as screening, assessment, and profiling are provided to
distinguish between educational and clinical practices. Emphasis is placed on taking a
holistic view of a child's strengths and difficulties, supported by multiple data sources
such as observations, family history, and informal or standardised assessments. A wide
range of cognitive, behavioural, and emotional skills can influence learning and should be
considered in assessment.
33
The identification section underscores the importance of ongoing professional
development for educators and collaboration with healthcare specialists (e.g.,
psychologists, speech and language therapists, and paediatricians) where appropriate.
Although a formal assessment may help inform support, children can still be identified
and supported using a needs-based approach without a formal label. Although the SEND
Code of Practice (DfE, 2015) requires schools to support children and young people with
needs even without a diagnosis, there are still relatively few tools available for use by
mainstream educators without specialist qualifications. In her review of the literature,
Ross (2020) argues that many educational professionals are not sufficiently prepared to
identify and support children and young people with specific learning difficulties. She
recommends that Initial Teacher Training frameworks should include training on SEND.
Here, she highlights the gaps in teacher's knowledge of identification of need and
effective support planning and recommends specific approaches to address these gaps.
These include information and training on SEND in ITT frameworks, providing schools
with access to specialist teachers and assessors who should receive funding to complete
their training and qualifications.
Our REA also highlights literacy as a key area of concern for children and young people
with cognition and learning difficulties and across SEND more broadly. Frameworks such
as the Simple View of Reading and Scarborough's reading rope, outline the core
components of literacy development, including decoding, language comprehension,
vocabulary, fluency, and motivation. A tiered approach to identification may be useful,
starting with whole-class screening tools like phonics screeners and curriculum-based
measures.
Standardised reading assessments and dynamic assessments are discussed. While
dynamic tools may offer additional insights into learning potential, they often lack clear
scoring guidelines. Evidence suggests using a combination of informal assessments and
structured tools where appropriate, while interpretation should involve SENCos or trained
assessors where needed. Oral reading and reading comprehension tasks are best
conducted one-to-one or through paired reading to minimise anxiety and potential
embarrassment associated with reading aloud in front of peers.
In mathematics, although no studies were retrieved in the REA, a recent systematic
review is summarised which identifies several evidence-based numeracy assessment
tools and screeners available in English. These tools target early numeracy skills in
young children and vary in ease of use and training requirements. Tools such as the
TRS-EN and ASPENS are noted as particularly practical options for classroom teachers.
Consistent with previous reviews (e.g., Carroll et al., 2017; Van Herwegen et al., 2024),
our REA found relatively little evidence on identifying cognition and learning difficulties in
secondary pupils compared to primary-aged pupils. This imbalance is likely due to
several factors. First, early identification and intervention are important to ensure pupils
34
receive the support that they need, so research has tended to focus on the primary
years. Second, as children age, the developmental trajectory of literacy skills changes,
and assessment can become more complex. Older pupils may develop coping strategies,
such as memorising words or avoiding certain tasks, that can mask underlying difficulties
making them difficult to identify. Others may be impacted by accumulated negative
effects of difficulties in maths or literacy such as a smaller vocabulary, limited concept
knowledge and low motivation (Biancarosa & Snow, 2004). Thus, more work is needed to
understand this greater variability in skills of secondary pupils and how to identify needs
that may be more complex.
In summary, while specialist support is often needed to formally diagnose learning
difficulties, teachers can play a central role in early identification through structured
observation, use of accessible tools, and collaboration with other professionals.
Alongside these tools, maintaining open communication with teaching assistants,
parents, and SEND staff ensures a more rounded understanding of each student's
reading development. While these methods may not provide a formal diagnosis, they
allow teachers to make informed decisions about differentiation, targeted interventions, or
the need for further assessment by specialists.
35
Support and intervention
The aim of this section is to review the studies from our search that focused on support
and intervention strategies suitable for use by mainstream education professionals. Here
we focus specifically on approaches that are effective in supporting educational
outcomes including literacy, writing, maths, science, and general attainment. This section
is organised into two parts: universal approaches and high-quality teaching strategies
that support children and young people at the first tier of the graduated approach, and
then targeted approaches tailored to specific areas of need such as difficulties in literacy
and mathematics.
When reporting on intervention and support strategies in this REA, we sometimes refer to
effect sizes that were reported in the studies reviewed. Effect sizes range from 0 to 1 and
refer to how much of a difference an approach or intervention makes, beyond just
whether it works. A small effect (around 0.2) means a modest improvement, a medium
effect (around 0.5) suggests moderate improvement or progress, and a large effect (0.8
or more) indicates a strong improvement on learning. Additionally, evidence can come
from various study designs, each differing in the strength and type of reliability they offer.
Single-case designs provide strong evidence for the consistency of effects within
individuals, making them valuable for understanding how interventions work in specific
cases. However, their findings may not be widely generalisable (i.e., applicable to other
individuals and/or settings). In contrast, group-design studies such as randomised
controlled trials offer more generalisable results across larger populations but may
overlook important individual differences in how students respond to interventions.
Ideally, a strong body of evidence should be based off of multiple types of study designs.
Universal support: High quality teaching and classroom
support
Support for students with SEND can be provided at different levels, starting with universal
strategies delivered to all students through evidence-based 'quality first' teaching
approaches. Universal provision, or 'tier 1' consists of evidence-based pedagogical
approaches and may be delivered as whole-class teaching, small groups, or even
individual activities. When universal approaches aren't enough to meet the educational
needs of students, targeted support can be offered, tailored to individual needs, and
implemented either in small groups or through one-to-one interventions. Finally, if this
second 'tier 2' is still not effectively addressing the needs of students, support can be
offered at the third 'tier 3' which consists of specialist support which may involve external
professionals such as Speech and Language Therapists or coordinated multi-agency
support (e.g., through an EHC plan). This so-called tiered approach to support children's
educational needs is well established in the UK educational context (e.g., see SEND
Code of Practice, 2015). Similar models are also used in the US educational context
36
such as response to intervention models (Fuchs & Fuchs, 2006) or multi-tiered systems
of support (McIntosh & Goodman, 2016), where children who do not progress with
effective universal treatment are offered more individualised and targeted support. The
SEND Code of Practice defines high-quality teaching:
High-quality teaching, differentiated for individual pupils, is the first step in responding to
pupils who have or may have SEND. Additional intervention and support cannot
compensate for a lack of good quality teaching (DfE, 2015, p. 99).
By providing high-quality teaching that is evidence-based and differentiated, schools may
reduce the likelihood that students will require additional, more intensive support. A range
of inclusive instructional strategies and classroom design approaches can support
children and young people with cognition and learning difficulties. The approaches
identified in our rapid review include instructional techniques and adjustments to the
physical or social environment.
Instructional approaches
Academic difficulties among children and young people with cognition and learning needs
may stem from underlying challenges with executive functions, including attention,
working memory, planning, and organisation (executive function is covered in more detail
within our Cross-Cutting Themes Report). Given the challenges children and young
people with cognition and learning difficulties may have with executive functions, it is
important to use instructional strategies that support these functions and reduce cognitive
load. Instructional approaches refer to the methods, strategies, and techniques that
educators use to facilitate learning and help students achieve specific learning goals.
These practices include how teachers deliver content, organise learning activities,
provide feedback, and adapt instruction to meet diverse student needs.
Techniques that provide structure, break tasks into manageable steps, use clear
prompts/cues and explicit instruction have been found to be effective for children and
young people with cognition and learning difficulties as they can help to reduce cognitive
load. These strategies can be implemented at the whole-class level or during targeted
intervention delivery (e.g., Carroll et al., 2017; Dennis et al., 2016; Myers et al., 2021).
These techniques include explicit instruction, peer-assisted learning, scaffolding, the use
of mnemonics (especially for learning key facts), task-sequencing, and metacognitive
approaches.
Research indicates that whole-class high-quality phonics instruction benefits children with
or at risk of literacy difficulties when it is systematic, explicit, and delivered by trained
teachers (Castles et al., 2018). Previous meta-analyses (e.g., Ehri et al., 2001; National
Reading Panel, 2000) show that systematic phonics improves decoding and word
reading for all children, with particularly strong effects for struggling readers when
37
instruction includes ample practice, scaffolded feedback, and opportunities to apply skills
in connected text. One systematic review included in our REA by Alqurani and Rao
(2020) analysed single-subject design studies of reading interventions for children aged 6
to 15 and found that sight-word recognition could be improved through a two-part phonics
instruction sequence using direct instruction approach, sight words with connected text,
and direct instruction flashcards system. These studies also focused on supporting
phonological awareness, phonics, and vocabulary as part of instruction.
Vocabulary can also be supported at the whole-class level through effective instructional
approaches. One systematic review (Kuder, 2017) compared several different instruction
methods to support vocabulary for children aged 11 to 18 and found that the most
effective methods were mnemonic instruction, morphemic analysis strategies, direct
instruction, and multimedia instruction. Peer-mediated approaches also showed positive
effects, though their impact couldn't be isolated from the instructional methods used.
Explicit vocabulary instruction can also improve comprehension of content-specific
reading (e.g., reading science related materials) for secondary aged children with reading
difficulties (Kaldenberg et al., 2014).
Classroom environment
In the Cross-Cutting Themes Report of our collection of REAs, we highlight several
effective strategies to design inclusive classrooms which benefit children with different
types of SEND needs. These techniques therefore won't be repeated here. Instead, we
focus on reducing processing demands to support challenges with executive functioning.
Similar to instructional approaches, reducing the load of sensory information and
processing demands is helpful for children and young people with cognitive and learning
challenges (Carroll et al., 2017). Classrooms and school environments can be highly
stimulating and overwhelming for pupils with cognition and learning needs. For example,
in a randomised controlled trial (RCT), Dockrell and Sheild (2006) found that speed of
processing for children and young people with SEND can be negatively impacted by
background babble and external noises such as sirens or lorries. Minimising background
noise and even considering acoustic panelling in classrooms was found to help support
learning.
38
Universal (tier 1) strategies to support pupils with cognition and learning needs
summary
Explicit instruction
High-quality phonics instruction
Peer-assisted learning
Scaffolding
Mnemonics
Multimedia instruction
Task-sequencing
Metacognitive approaches
Minimising unnecessary stimuli in classrooms
Targeted support
Pupils who do not make expected progress despite high-quality teaching and universal
support should receive timely, evidence-informed targeted support, with their
development regularly reviewed, and such interventions must adhere to principles shown
to be effective.
Role of specialist teachers
Specialist teachers may be needed when a child does not make adequate progress
despite high-quality, differentiated classroom teaching and targeted interventions (Tier 1
and Tier 2). They are particularly important when there is evidence of specific learning
difficulties (e.g., dyslexia, dyscalculia) requiring structured, individualised teaching
approaches (DfE/ DoH, 2015; Rose, 2009). Specialist teachers are educators with
additional training to assess, plan, and deliver targeted support for pupils with SEND,
particularly those with specific learning difficulties such as dyslexia or dyscalculia. To
qualify, these specialist teachers must have qualified teacher states as well as a
postgraduate Level 5 or Level 7 specialist qualification in SpLD (e.g., dyslexia), such as
those accredited by the British Dyslexia Association (BDA). Some are also qualified to
carry out diagnostic assessments and hold an Assessment Practising Certificate (APC).
This makes them well-placed in both the assessment and support processes.
39
Specialist teachers are trained in foundational understanding of SpLDs and different
areas of literacy or maths that may need to be targeted. Their training involves lessons
on designing and delivering evidence-based interventions, including structured,
cumulative, and multisensory phonics programmes, and in adapting curriculum content to
make learning accessible for individual pupils. Their training also includes monitoring and
evaluating pupil progress through standardised and curriculum-based assessments, as
well as collaborating closely with classroom teachers, parents, and other professionals to
implement and review personalised support plans. They may also be trained in
psychometric assessment principles to assess and identify specific learning difficulties
such as dyslexia, dyscalculia, and other cognition and learning needs using a range of
assessment tools.
Specialist teachers can contribute in various ways, including identifying and assessing
specific learning difficulties, planning structured intervention programmes, and working
directly with individual pupils. They also can play a role in supporting classroom teachers
and teaching assistants, as well as raising awareness of specific learning difficulties
within schools.
Literacy support
Children and young people with different cognition and learning needs may struggle with
various aspects of literacy including reading, spelling, and/or writing. Children and young
people with dyslexia may particularly show challenges with areas of phonological
awareness, decoding, and phonics. However, as discussed in the 'Identification and
assessment of need' section of this REA, they may also show difficulties in other areas of
reading, writing, and spelling.
Early reading instruction typically focuses on phonological awareness, phonics and
decoding processes while older learners often focus more on fluency and comprehension
processes. In general, literacy interventions provided in primary years have larger
impacts compared to literacy interventions in secondary likely because they target
foundational skills during a period of high neuroplasticity and rapid development, before
difficulties become long-standing and compounded by wider academic demands. Thus,
early intervention is important as later difficulties with reading can be prevented with
proper reading interventions (Fuchs et al., 2008; Partanen & Siegel, 2014; Torgesen et
al., 2001). However, it is still important to support fluency, vocabulary, and
comprehension in younger learners, and some older learners will continue to benefit from
some phonological awareness-based interventions.
Given that each literacy skill can impact others, the target of high-quality instruction or
targeted intervention will depend on each learner's individual profile. For example,
readers who struggle with reading fluency may also struggle with word recognition,
vocabulary development and reading motivation (e.g., Chard et al., 2002). In turn, poor
40
reading fluency can impact reading comprehension because readers are often focusing
on decoding and word-reading leaving little cognitive processing for comprehending the
meaning of a text (e.g., Lange, 2019).
It is important to note that terms such as literacy disability, reading difficulty, struggling
readers, and learning disability are often used interchangeably in research. There is
ongoing debate around the use of labels like dyslexia, and participants in studies are
frequently recruited without a formal diagnosis, based instead on the presence of reading
or literacy difficulties. This means that study samples often include a broad group of
struggling readers, such as those with low reading achievement, unidentified reading
difficulties, dyslexia, and/or those identified with a learning disability. Therefore, it is not
always possible to say which literacy interventions may support those with a SpLD better
than those with MLD or GLD. Therefore, this section will address specific needs related
to literacy (e.g., reading comprehension, handwriting difficulties) rather than by specific
diagnostic area.
Decoding and phonological awareness
Decoding and phonological awareness skills need to be supported for successful
reading. They are typically learned during the early years and key stage 1 and are often
the focus of targeted interventions for children of this age. The most effective way of
teaching these early literacy skills is through structured, systematic phonics programmes
supplemented by engaging with real book reading (Melby-Lervag et al., 2012).
Accurate decoding of words is supported by early oral language skills as well as
phonological awareness skills (Castles et al., 2018). However, even with high-quality
phonics instruction, some children and young people with dyslexia and other literacy
difficulties continue to struggle with these skills, and they are often the targets of early
intervention. For more information on oral language support and targeted interventions
for oral language difficulties, refer to our Speech, Language, and Communication Needs
Report in this series of reviews.
Goldfeld et al. (2022) reviewed 55 small-group oral language and early reading
intervention studies for children aged 4 to 9. The review identified a shortlist of six
interventions with the strongest evidence of improving oral language or reading
outcomes: These six interventions are as follows:
1. The Early Reading Intervention (ERI) is a commercially available kindergarten
beginning reading intervention designed to supplement classroom instruction for
students at risk of experiencing reading difficulties. It includes instruction in
phonological awareness and writing and spelling with previously taught phonics
skills.
41
2. The Phonological and Strategy Training (PHAST) and Phonological Awareness
and Blending (PHAB) are related Canadian programmes developed to support
children with reading disabilities. The PHAB targets early phonological awareness
and blending skills in children from ages 4 to 16 focusing on the critical precursor
skills for decoding. The PHAST is available for primary and secondary aged
children with reading difficulties, combining phonological training with explicit
decoding strategies, such as identifying syllable types and flexible word attack
approaches (Lovett et al., 1994). This strategy was implemented with the RAVE-O
programme (Retrieval, Automaticity, Vocabulary, Elaboration, Orthography) which
is a separate but complementary programme to the PHAST and the PHAB,
focusing on fluency through rapid retrieval of word forms, morphological
awareness, and semantic networks. It is designed to complement phonics
instruction by building speed, vocabulary richness, and deep orthographic
knowledge.
3. Read Well-Aligned is an early literacy intervention tool designed to support
students in developing foundational reading skills, particularly in the early primary
years. Specifically, this programme targets phonemic awareness, phonics and
decoding, vocabulary development, oral reading fluency, and comprehension. This
programme involves scripted lessons delivered to small groups with regular
assessments embedded to measure progress.
4. The phonological awareness and phonics intervention (unnamed) developed and
delivered by Ryder, Tunmer, and Greaney (2008) involved 56 sequenced, semi-
scripted lessons with explicit instruction in phonemic awareness and phonemically
based decoding strategies. The intervention was delivered by a teacher aide to
small-groups over a period of 24 weeks.
5. Story friends is an early language intervention designed to improve oral language
skills in preschool children at risk for language delays. It was developed by
Goldstein and colleagues (2016) and is typically delivered in small groups (usually
2-3 children) by teachers or teaching assistants in early years settings. This
intervention targets vocabulary development, listening comprehension, and
inferencing through storybook-based lessons with explicit instruction.
6. Lonigan and Phillips' (2016) unnamed needs-aligned intervention provided one
programme that targeted phonological awareness and phonics, as well as a
second programme that targeted syntax and vocabulary for children who had
difficulties in either or both of these areas. Delivery consisted of short and
intensive instruction to small groups.
In terms of implementation, these interventions typically included groups of 3 to 5
students and involved 4 to 5 sessions per week for a minimum of 11 weeks. The content
of the different interventions focused on multiple language and reading components, but
most commonly on phonological awareness and phonics. In general, these approaches
42
are effective because they include a range of pedagogical strategies, most commonly,
modelling, and explicit instruction, but also scaffolding, metacognitive techniques,
corrective feedback, self-monitoring, and interactive elements.
Another systematic review of randomised controlled trials investigated the effects of
targeted decoding interventions for children aged 5 to 8 at-risk of reading difficulties (e.g.,
with assessed word decoding skills in or below the 40th percentile) (Nilvius et al., 2021).
This review used strict criteria to include high-quality studies. The review found that
explicit instruction in phonemic awareness, phonics, and sight word reading in small
groups were effective, particularly for preventing later reading difficulties. Most
interventions had multiple components to support generalisation (i.e., the ability to apply
skills learned in one context to new contexts). Specific named interventions within the
review included: (1) the Systematic Early Reading Intervention with phonological
awareness, integrating writing and spelling with phonemic and alphabetic skills; (2) an
unnamed intervention focusing on irregular word reading, phonological awareness,
sound spelling, blending and word reading, accuracy and fluency reading decodable text,
encoding practice, reteaching of challenging words; (3) explicit reading instruction
phonologically based, phonemic decoding and spelling, text reading for fluency,
comprehension instruction; and (4) phonological awareness, word attack, sight word,
fluency, spelling, comprehension. Interventions lasted between 12 and 26 weeks and
were delivered for 30-45 minutes 3-5 times per week. This delivery supports the
distributed practice approach where shorter and more frequent sessions are more
effective than massed practice (e.g., continuous periods of skill practice without intervals)
(Cepeda et al., 2006; Hattie, 2009; Torgesen et al., 2001).
Stevens et al. (2021) reviewed several studies to evaluate how effective the Orton-
Gillingham approach is for teaching reading and spelling for pupils with, or at risk of,
word-level reading difficulties. This structured, multisensory approach involves dividing
reading and spelling into smaller parts related to letters and sounds and gradually
developing these abilities step by step. While the approach showed a small positive
effect, the results were not statistically significant for key reading skills like phonics,
fluency, spelling, vocabulary, or comprehension, suggesting we still need more high-
quality research to be confident about its impact.
In a meta-analysis, Wanzek et al. (2018) found a positive impact of intensive (i.e.,
provided for 100 or more sessions) early reading interventions for children aged 5 to 9
with or at risk of reading difficulties. The reading interventions in this meta-analysis
included:
1. Early Reading Intervention (ERI) programme targets students at risk of reading
difficulties, supplementing classroom instruction with lessons focused on
phonological awareness, phonics, and basic writing skills.
43
2. The Responsive Reading Instruction (RRI) programme is an early intervention
programme that combines phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary,
and comprehension strategies. This programme emphasises continuous
assessment to inform instructional decisions in a dynamic and adaptive way
(Simmons et al., 2008). The programme consists of five lesson components
designed to be implemented within a 40-min lesson. Teachers provide direct,
explicit instruction in phonics skills and text-reading strategies, as well as
modelling and instructional scaffolding as students apply these skills and
strategies while reading and writing connected text. Due to the continuous
assessment and decision-making components involved in this intervention, most
studies have included specific teacher training or researcher supervision in
implementation.
3. Synthetic phonics is a method of teaching reading that emphasises explicit
instruction in how graphemes (letters or letter combinations) correspond to
phonemes (speech sounds), and how these phonemes can be blended
(synthesised) to decode words (Johnston & Watson, 2007). It follows a systematic
and incremental approach, typically beginning with simple, regular sound-letter
correspondences and progressing to more complex ones, with the goal of
enabling pupils to decode unfamiliar words independently through blending. When
supplemented with an Orton-Gillingham approach it includes multisensory
techniques (visual, auditory, and kinaesthetic).
4. Reading Mastery: Developed by Engelmann and Bruner (1988), this programme is
a direct instruction method that includes scripted lessons to teach reading skills,
focusing on decoding, fluency, and comprehension. It is designed for early
learners and uses a highly structured approach.
5. Corrective Reading is similar to Reading Mastery, this programme focuses on
improving fluency and comprehension in struggling readers through systematic,
step-by-step instruction. It includes a range of exercises aimed at decoding,
vocabulary, and text comprehension.
6. Sound Linkage programme is a phonics-based approach that supports students in
learning letter-sound correspondences and blending sounds to form words. It
integrates speech, reading, and writing exercises to reinforce skills.
7. Sound Partners is a reading intervention programme designed for young children,
especially those with reading disabilities. It focuses on phonological awareness,
letter-sound correspondence, and word decoding through one-on-one or small
group sessions.
8. Early Steps is a programme focused on early literacy development, specifically for
preschool and early primary school students. It includes activities designed to
foster phonemic awareness, letter recognition, and basic writing skills.
44
9. Read, Write, and Type is a programme that combines reading and writing skills
with the use of technology. It is designed for students with dyslexia and helps
them develop phonological awareness, spelling, and typing skills through
interactive lessons.
10. The Lindamood-Bell programmes are designed to improve reading and
comprehension by focusing on sensory-cognitive processing. These programs use
multisensory techniques to help students process language more effectively,
targeting areas such as phonemic awareness, language comprehension, and
fluency.
Wanzek et al. (2018) found that the positive effects of the interventions did not appear to
differ by group size or hours of intervention. However, given that some previous research
has found that decreasing group-size is one effective way to increase intervention
intensity and improve students' response to intervention, the authors call for further
research investigating differences in group-size. The meta-analysis also highlighted the
lack of research on individualised interventions compared to the research on manualised
interventions with prescriptive lessons and materials.
Effective early reading support strategies summary
Systematic phonics instruction
Oral language interventions
Explicit instruction in phonological awareness, decoding, and sight word
instruction
Interventions for older learners with word-reading difficulties
Older learners (ages 8 to 18) with dyslexia or other literacy difficulties may continue to
struggle with accurate and fluent word reading skills. One meta-analysis (Boucher et al.,
2024) investigated word-reading interventions across 22 studies for children aged 8 and
older who had word-reading difficulties (not necessarily with a diagnosis of SpLD).
Interventions were targeted multicomponent (e.g., including vocabulary, reading
comprehension, decoding, fluency, phonological awareness, and spelling) reading
interventions delivered in small groups during school hours. In terms of dosage, the
number of intervention sessions ranged from 12 to 155 over a period of 4 to 32 weeks.
Sessions lasted an average of 43 minutes, with durations ranging from 10 minutes to one
hour.
Findings suggested more total hours spent on an intervention resulted in better reading
outcomes, specifically pseudo-word reading (i.e., decoding) and fluency, but the number
of sessions or duration of sessions may not significantly impact outcomes. However, it is
important to note that interventions are generally more effective when delivered with a
45
distributed practice approach. Multicomponent interventions are effective for older
students with persistent reading difficulties, but based on findings from this study, it was
not clear which instructional components are most essential, how much time should be
devoted to each, and whether the order of instruction matters. While most studies in
Boucher et al.'s (2024) meta-analysis included word reading as a component, no single
component was linked to significantly better outcomes. The limited ability to isolate the
effects of individual components was noted as a methodological limitation.
Strategies to support older learners with word reading difficulties summary
Targeted multicomponent (e.g., including vocabulary, reading comprehension,
decoding, fluency, phonological awareness, and spelling) reading interventions
delivered in small groups during school hours
Reading fluency
Lee and Yoon (2017) reviewed 34 studies investigating the impact of repeated reading.
Repeated reading is an instructional strategy aimed at improving reading fluency,
particularly for students with reading difficulties. In repeated reading, a student reads the
same passage (typically a short text between 50-200 words) multiple times (usually three
to four times) until they reach a certain level of fluency (which is measured by speed,
accuracy, and appropriate inflection). Repeated reading can also be delivered as a whole
class strategy with paired reading.
The review found that repeated reading was effective for children with reading difficulties
aged 5 and older in improving reading fluency. Positive effects on reading fluency were
further improved when a listening passage preview (listening to the text being read aloud
first) was incorporated alongside repeated reading strategies, especially in primary-aged
children.
Reading fluency can also be supported by technology-assisted interventions. A
systematic review of case studies (e.g., Mize et al., 2023) categorised technology use in
fluency interventions into four groups: presenting text only on a screen (Text), providing
model reading only (Read Aloud), combining text presentation with model reading (Text +
Read Aloud), and combining text, model reading, and vocabulary support (Text + Read
Aloud + Vocabulary Support). All approaches showed positive effects on oral reading
fluency, with the strongest outcomes observed when vocabulary support was provided by
offering definitions for unknown/unfamiliar words. Findings also indicated that the effects
of the intervention did not differ by age, however they did differ by mode of delivery.
Here, studies that used laptops or desktop computers reported more effective results
compared to studies using tablets.
46
Reading fluency support strategies summary
Repeated reading
Technology-assisted interventions
Vocabulary support
Vocabulary knowledge can be effectively taught and supported as a Tier 2 intervention
for children and young people with reading difficulties. One systematic review (Louick et
al., 2023) found that vocabulary interventions that also incorporated motivational
techniques such as goal-setting and monitoring, self-graphing (e.g., keeping a regular
recording of one's ongoing scores/progress on a personal graph, either on graph paper
or on the computer), using high-interest texts, and using rewards were effective for
children aged 5 and older at risk of literacy or language difficulties.
Presenting new vocabulary in its written form can enhance acquisition and retention in
children and young people. A systematic review (Clark & Reuterskiöld, 2021) shows that
children aged 7-11 with developmental language disorder (DLD), Down syndrome,
autism, and dyslexia benefit from including written words (orthographic representations)
during vocabulary learning rather than with images or oral presentation alone. Studies
found that presenting the written form alongside spoken input helps these children learn
new words more quickly and accurately, especially in tasks like picture naming. These
findings suggest that integrating written word forms into vocabulary instruction can
support better word retention, and that encouraging educators on the use of strategies
that make the written word a visible part of learning could be beneficial for children with
these needs.
Vocabulary support strategies summary
Incorporating motivational techniques with vocabulary teaching
Presenting written form along with the spoken form of vocabulary
Reading comprehension
As students move into secondary school, reading comprehension demands become
more challenging. They must not only decode text but also understand more specialised
language and complex text structures specific to different subjects (Catts, 2022).
Our REA highlighted several techniques that have been found to be effective in
improving reading comprehension for students of various ages with reading difficulties.
For example, Read-aloud strategies have been effective for children aged 6 to 15 with
intellectual or developmental disabilities (Alqurani & Rao, 2020). A Read-aloud strategy is
when an adult (e.g., teacher or caregiver) reads a text out loud to students in a way that
actively engages them with the content. This can involve questioning strategies, thinking
47
out loud models (like predicting, summarising, clarifying), drawing connections, or
discussing unfamiliar words.
A second is explicitly teaching text structure, which involves directly showing students
how different types of texts are organised (e.g., cause and effect, compare and contrast,
problem and solution, or chronological order). Students are taught to use this knowledge
to understand and summarise what they read. Instruction typically includes modelling,
guided practice, and the use of signal words and graphic organisers to help students
identify and use these structures independently.
Explicitly teaching text structure improves expository reading comprehension in
adolescents with or at risk of learning disabilities, with moderately strong evidence
showing large effects (Hall-Mills & Marante, 2022).
Boon et al. (2015) reviewed 12 studies on story mapping interventions for children aged
11 and older with a learning disability or related disorder (e.g., dyslexia). Story mapping
is an instructional strategy used to help students understand and remember the key
elements of a narrative text. This strategy involves creation of visual representations,
such as a graphic organiser, that breaks down the structure of a narrative into key
components such as beginning, middle, end, plot, setting, characters, conflict, etc.
Findings indicated that the use of a story map was an effective strategy to improve
students' ability to recall and comprehend the key story grammar components in short,
narrative story passages. Seven studies reported positive outcomes, either when story
mapping was used on its own or alongside other strategies such as modelling or guided
practice aimed at improving reading comprehension. Of the remaining studies, most
showed moderate to slight improvements, with one reporting no significant benefit,
though the authors noted possible confounding factors. Overall, the evidence supports
story mapping as a helpful tool for improving narrative comprehension.
Self-questioning strategies can also be effective for reading comprehension outcomes for
children with reading difficulties. One systematic review (Daniel & Williams, 2021)
reported positive effects of self-questioning strategies on reading comprehension for
children aged 5 to 17 who struggled with reading. Self-questioning strategies help
students monitor their understanding, think about the content, and engage with the task
through generating questions about the text. This strategy can also help students pause
and review the text to check their understanding or apply their background knowledge in
cases where they are uncertain of the answers. Techniques such as asking 'Wh'
questions (e.g., who, what, when, where, and why) or generating questions about themes
or main ideas can be used. These strategies are sometimes embedded within wider
reading comprehension intervention programmes.
48
The interventions in this systematic review were delivered either in small groups or in
one-to-one sessions Intervention dosage ranged from 1 to 13.5 total hours of intervention
and frequency of delivery ranged from once a day to once a week, and group sizes
ranging from one-on-one sessions to groups. According to this analysis the effects may
improve with two or more total hours of self-questioning strategies.
In the research literature, metacognitive and multicomponent strategies (e.g.,
interventions with some combination of the following: explicit instruction in phonics,
fluency, text structures, and vocabulary as well as development of background
knowledge) are two common instructional strategies that support adolescents' reading
comprehension (e.g., Ahmed et al., 2014; Fogarty et al., 2014). These strategies were
compared in a meta-analysis of interventions for struggling readers aged 12 to 18 (Sohn
et al., 2023). Other strategies were also investigated including instruction that focuses
exclusively on phonics, peer-mediated strategies, or computer-adapted instruction (CAI).
Metacognitive strategies showed the most effective reading comprehension outcomes.
The researchers also tested whether factors like text type (expository or narrative),
instructional setting (mainstream versus specialist classrooms), and group size (small
groups) influenced how effective the reading interventions were. None of these factors
were found to be significant moderators, meaning they did not make a meaningful
difference in how well the interventions worked.
In a meta-analysis, Scammacca et al. (2015) investigated any type of reading instruction,
including word study, fluency, vocabulary, reading comprehension, or multiple
components of reading instruction for children aged 9 and older with reading difficulties.
They found that vocabulary and comprehension-based interventions tended to be more
effective than fluency or other types of reading support, especially for improving
comprehension skills.
Both Scammacca et al. (2015) and Sohn et al. (2023) found that relatively shorter
intervention durations (i.e., up to two months) demonstrated better outcomes in reading
comprehension than longer interventions for children and young people aged 9 to 21.
However, this result should be interpreted with caution, as these findings may be
confounded by other factors. These include differences in how students are classified as
'struggling readers' across studies, the type of intervention and its intensity, and the
reliance on standardised measures to measure reading comprehension (e.g.,
standardised tests versus curriculum measures). Given this, it's not clear based on the
studies found in this REA whether shorter versus longer reading comprehension
interventions are more effective.
49
Effective reading comprehension support strategies summary
Read-aloud
Explicit teaching of text structure
Story mapping
Self-questioning strategies and thinking out loud
Metacognitive and multi-component approaches for older learners (e.g., including
vocabulary, reading comprehension, decoding, fluency, phonological awareness,
and spelling)
Morphological awareness
Morphological awareness (MA) is the ability to recognise and manipulate morphemes,
the smallest units of meaning in language, including base words, prefixes, and suffixes
(Carlisle, 2000; Apel, 2014). For example, the inflectional suffix 'ing' may be added to
base words to indicate progressive tense, as in 'singing'. In the multimorphemic word
'reaction', the base morpheme 'act' means 'do', the prefix 're' adds a second meaning
unit, 'again/against' and the derivational suffix 'ion' adds a third, transforming the verb to
an abstract noun.
Morphological awareness typically begins to develop as pre-school children become
aware of inflectional rules in spoken language and is important for the development of
literacy skills including word reading, reading comprehension, and spelling (e.g., Kirby et
al., 2012; Pittas & Nunes, 2012; Levesque et al., 2021). A growing body of literature
suggests that understanding morphemes significantly correlates with reading proficiency
across both child and adult populations (see Rastle, 2018, for a review).
One systematic review (Brady & Mason, 2024) investigated morphological awareness
interventions targeting reading and writing outcomes (i.e., decoding, reading
comprehension, vocabulary, spelling, and writing) in students aged 5 to 18 with literacy
difficulties. The morphological awareness strategies included strategies that focused on
affix and root word identification, segmenting, and word-building activities. All 10 studies
included identification tasks such as word sorts, decoding, or initial instruction that
involved identification of word parts of morphologically complex words through oral or
written strategies. Intervention duration ranged from 9 days (Wolter & Dilworth, 2014) to
approximately 15 weeks and each study had a set intervention time that ranged from 25
to 45 min per session.
Four of the ten studies reviewed by Brady and Mason (2024) focused on developing
word segmenting skills through morphological awareness strategies. For example, Harris
et al. (2011) introduced a generative morphological analysis word mapping approach,
50
where students broke words into prefix, root, and suffix to derive meaning, and compared
it to a non-generative strategy. Other studies (Apel et al., 2013; Apel & Diehm, 2014;
Brimo, 2016) used hands-on and written tasks where students added or removed affixes
using letter blocks or identified affixes in printed word lists. To support word building,
eight of the studies included interactive oral or written activities. Several studies also
employed tasks such as "Say it another way," prompting students to change a base word
into a different morphological form (e.g., "to dance right now" becomes "dancing"). Other
studies used manipulatives or games to teach affixation, such as building words with
letter blocks (Good et al., 2015), spelling games using morphological patterns (Wolter &
Dilworth, 2014), or guided spelling tasks that incorporated prompts for suffix rules (Kirk &
Gillon, 2009). These approaches aimed to strengthen students' morphological awareness
by explicitly teaching the structure and formation of complex words.
For primary aged children, the morphological awareness interventions led to positive
outcomes in decoding, reading comprehension, spelling and vocabulary after relatively
short interventions (8 to 39 sessions). For secondary aged students, morphological
awareness interventions led to positive outcomes in vocabulary, spelling and writing
composition. However, only one study in the review included learners aged 11 to 14
(upper primary to lower secondary), indicating that further research is needed to
strengthen the evidence base for this age group.
Morphological awareness strategies to support reading and writing summary
Teaching affix and root word identification
Segmenting
Word-building activities
Morphological analysis
Word mapping
Motivation and self-regulation strategies for literacy
As previously discussed, motivation and attitudes about reading can have an impact on
literacy skills. If a child is not motivated to read or holds negative attitudes about reading,
this may reduce their interest in reading and limit their exposure and engagement with
texts, which in turn can hinder literacy development. Promoting self-determination and
self-advocacy in learners can help address these challenges by encouraging children
and young people to take an active role in their own learning. When students are
supported to set goals and understand their own learning needs, they are more likely to
develop positive attitudes toward reading and to persist when faced with difficulties. This,
in turn, can foster greater confidence, autonomy, and sustained engagement in literacy-
51
related activities. Three studies in our REA investigated motivation, self-determination,
and self-regulation strategies in reading interventions.
Cho et al. (2023) investigated whether incorporating motivational strategies and supports
into reading interventions influenced reading outcomes for children aged 5 to 11 with
dyslexia. Across 53 reading intervention studies that were reviewed, most interventions
included general motivational supports (e.g., such as game-like activities, peer
collaboration, rewards, and goal setting) and only a small proportion explicitly taught
motivational strategies. In this context, motivational supports are interest-based elements
that support autonomy whereas instructional strategies align with self-regulatory
instruction and goal/attribution training approaches (McBreen & Savage, 2021).
Importantly, interventions that included direct motivational strategy instruction led to
larger improvements in reading outcomes, particularly in word reading, compared to
those that used only general supports or none at all. This highlights the added value of
explicitly addressing motivation as part of reading intervention design for younger
learners.
Motivational strategy instructional interventions can be embedded within reading
instruction and teach students to be more goal-directed by incorporating goal setting,
asking learners to monitor progress towards their goals or performance. Growth mindset
beliefs about reading are encouraged and learners are taught to engage in self-talk to
internalise positive attitudes towards reading.
Similarly, Didion et al. (2015) found that interventions that incorporated one or more
components of self-determination skills positively impacted a range of reading outcomes
(i.e., reading fluency, reading comprehension, reading accuracy and vocabulary) for
children aged 5-11 with or at risk for learning disabilities. In addition, Berkeley and Larsen
(2018) found that reading comprehension interventions that included self-regulation
strategies were beneficial in improving reading comprehension skills in adolescents with
reading difficulties.
Self-determination skills may involve goal setting, decision-making, self-advocacy, self-
regulation, self-monitoring, or self-awareness. In the studies included in Didion et al.'s
(2015) review, the most common strategies were goal setting for performance (e.g., such
as the number of vocabulary words to learn or comprehension questions to complete)
and to self-monitor their progress, often by tracking their results on checklists, graphs, or
self-recording tools. Some interventions also included self-evaluation tasks, where
students judged their understanding of words or reflected on their on-task behaviour,
sometimes reinforced through positive feedback or rewards (e.g., points, free time, or
reinforcers). Many interventions used explicit strategy instruction, such as self-
questioning or mnemonics (e.g., Think Before Reading, Think While Reading, and Think
After Reading for comprehension or identifying main ideas), and guided students through
structured steps for using these strategies effectively.
52
Several approaches also included visual aids or prompts (e.g., checklists or desk cards)
that were gradually faded to promote independence. Students were also encouraged to
develop attribution statements (e.g., "believe," "stay with it") to support motivational self-
talk during reading tasks. Some interventions incorporated self-contracts, choice-making,
or reinforcer systems, allowing students to select rewards based on their goal
completion. Overall, these strategies emphasised goal setting, self-monitoring, self-
reflection, and reinforcement, helping students take more ownership of their learning
while building persistence and motivation in academic tasks. However, this review also
highlights a significant gap in research on broader self-determination skills for this age
group.
Motivational and self-regulation strategies to support literacy summary
Embedding motivational strategies into reading interventions
Game-like activities
Peer collaboration
Use of rewards
Goal setting
Self-talk
Self-monitoring progress
Use of feedback
Check lists or desk cards
Self-questioning
Numeracy support
Children and young people with general and specific learning disabilities or at-risk for
maths difficulties may demonstrate challenges with mathematical facts and applying
procedural knowledge. They may struggle with areas such as early number concepts,
number combinations, and place value which can lead to errors in procedural
computation (i.e., step-by-step problem solving) and higher-level mathematics (e.g.,
Cirino et al., 2007; Zheng et al., 2011). They may also demonstrate challenges with
cognitive processes and executive functions which can further impact their maths skills
(e.g., Fuchs et al., 2011). However, research suggests that effective mathematics
intervention may help children and young people achieve age-appropriate levels of
achievement (Geary et al., 2013; Re et al., 2014).
53
A synthesis of 15 recent reviews and meta-analyses included in our REA highlight the
growing evidence base for effective mathematics interventions for students with general
learning difficulties, mathematics difficulties, and other developmental disorders,
including intellectual and developmental disabilities. This section is organised
thematically, starting with evidence on targeted mathematics instructional approaches
from multiple systematic reviews and meta-analyses, then moving to general problem-
solving strategies, followed by word-problem solving interventions.
Mathematics instructional approaches
In terms of targeted intervention delivery strategies, a large meta-analysis of 25 studies
compared various formats of mathematics instruction, either one-to-one or in small
groups, for children with mathematics difficulties (Dennis et al., 2016). The interventions
included in this review were designed to improve academic mathematics skills; however,
the outcomes varied across studies, and the specific results of each individual study were
not reported in detail. Instruction in the studies was provided across a number of domains
including algebra, basic facts, computation, early numeracy, fractions, general math
proficiency, and word problems. The majority of the intervention studies were for primary-
aged students with few studies done at older primary-age (i.e., age 5-6) level and none of
the studies at the secondary-level. The findings demonstrated that peer-assisted learning
approaches were most effective, followed by interventions using explicit teacher-led
instruction. Peer-assisted learning strategies are interventions where a student would
help another student or group of students to learn a particular concept. Intervention
effects were larger for primary children aged 6 to 11 than those for younger children.
Providing instructional recommendations to teachers (which were not specified in the
original study) and providing students with data (e.g., feedback on maths performance),
and the use of technology (e-books and computer-assisted instruction) were also
effective in improving maths outcomes but to a lesser extent than peer-assisted and
explicit teacher-led instruction. Results also suggested that intervention effects were
larger when delivered by researchers compared to teachers and teaching assistants,
meaning that interventions were more effective when delivered by researchers. However,
the review included few studies where teachers and teaching assistants delivered the
interventions. This suggests potential challenges in scaling up the interventions, with
Dennis et al. (2016) recommending conducting further research on large-scale
implementations.
A second systematic review yielded similar findings, showing that peer-assisted learning
and explicit teacher-led instruction in mathematics produced strong positive effects. In
contrast, approaches such as schema-based instruction (i.e., an instructional approach
used to teach mathematical problem solving, particularly word problems, by helping
students recognise and apply problem schemas, underlying structures or patterns
54
common to certain problem types), prompting, and scaffolding were also effective but to
a lesser extent (Bowman et al., 2019).
For students aged 11 to 18 with maths difficulties, a systematic review by Myers et al.
(2021) found that the most effective instructional techniques in maths included cognitive-
based instruction, technology-based interventions, and the use of visual representations
integrated with cognitive strategies. Cognitive-based instruction used cognitive or meta-
cognitive techniques, such as reasoning strategies, self-monitoring strategies (e.g., think-
aloud), or mnemonic devices to solve problems. Visual representation included the use of
concrete (e.g., manipulatives), semi concrete (e.g., pictures and diagrams), or abstract
(e.g., symbols) representations to learn concepts. In contrast, this study found no positive
effect for maths improvements for studies using schema-based instruction. However, this
could have been due to the relatively low number of studies using this strategy. The
review also found that long-term interventions (i.e., those lasting over 30 sessions)
produced larger effects than those implemented for fewer than seven sessions (i.e., short
term).
In addition, another systematic review also suggested explicit instruction and the use of
heuristics (i.e., general problem-solving strategies or rules of thumb such as simplifying
the maths problem) were effective for older students aged 9 to 12 (Stevens et al., 2018).
They also found that interventions lasting over 15 hours and those focused on fractions
showed significantly better outcomes in maths performance. However, interventions
targeting generalised mathematical skills (e.g., basic operations) or algebraic
expressions showed less impact, indicating the importance of targeting specific
mathematical content for optimal results.
Several other studies suggest digital-based interventions consistently lead to moderate to
strong improvements in various mathematics performance measures (Benavides-Varela
et al., 2020; Küçükalkan et al., 2019), word-problem solving skills (Kim & Xin, 2022;
Myers et al., 2023), and fact fluency among students with mathematics difficulties (Cozad
& Riccomini, 2016). These interventions often focus on fluency in basic operations and
vary in structure, timing, feedback, and platform (e.g., tablet VS. computer) and can be
delivered to studies across various ages from 5 and older. Techniques included
videogames, computer-assisted instruction in word-problem solving, and digital-based
tutorials/drilling. Games and interactive tools that encourage active reflection, adaptive
feedback, and cross-level skill transfer have been particularly beneficial. Given the
findings of Dennis et al. (2016), these digital-based interventions may be more effective
for older compared to younger students.
Finally, a review by Spooner et al. (2018) found that, similar to children and young people
with mathematics difficulties, those with more general learning difficulties also benefit
from systematic instruction, instructional procedures of technology-aided instruction,
graphic organisers, manipulatives, and explicit instruction (Spooner et al., 2018).
55
Instructional approaches to support maths summary
Peer-assisted learning
Explicit instruction
Use of technology
Reasoning strategies
Self-monitoring strategies (e.g., think-aloud)
Mnemonics
Use of visual representations
Longer interventions (e.g., over 15 total hours)
General maths problem-solving interventions
General problem solving in maths refers to the application of broad, transferable
strategies to tackle unfamiliar or non-routine problems, rather than relying solely on
memorised procedures or algorithms. It involves skills such as understanding the
problem, devising a plan, carrying out the plan, and evaluating the solution. These
strategies help learners make sense of problems, think flexibly, and apply reasoning
across various mathematical contexts. In terms of problem-solving, representation of
problems as an instructional strategy was found to be effective for children and young
people with learning difficulties or at-risk for mathematics difficulties in two systematic
reviews (Bowman et al., 2019; Jitendra et al., 2016).
1. Representation of mathematical problems' as a strategy refers to the use of
visual, verbal, symbolic, or physical models to represent abstract concepts such
as those in mathematics. This may include physical materials that can be
manipulated by children and young people, pictures or diagrams, real-life
situations, spoken language, or written symbols (Lesh et al., 1987). These
strategies help students understand and better interpret mathematical problems in
order to solve them. It is particularly useful for students with learning difficulties or
those with other types of SEND who may struggle with abstract thinking, such as
students with SEMH, dyscalculia, or general learning difficulties. Representations
is an effective approach as it helps in reducing working memory and attentional
demands to help development of abstract reasoning.
This strategy was most used for word problems but also supported learning of fractions
and basic maths facts. This strategy can be delivered to small-groups or one-to-one as a
targeted intervention or to the whole class as a universal strategy. While most of the
56
studies included in this review investigated the use of representation in primary-aged
children, there were some studies suggesting this was effective for older children as well.
However, interventions that combined visual models with other strategies (e.g., priming
problem structures or cognitive scaffolding) produced stronger effects than those using
visual models alone for secondary students (Jitendra et al., 2018).
2. Concrete-Representational-Abstract (CRA) is an instructional approach that
systematically uses representation. CRA is a three-phase instructional strategy
used to teach mathematical concepts by moving from concrete to abstract
understanding. First, children and young people are presented with concrete
representations such as physical objects to model the concepts. Then they
transition to drawings or visual representations and finally they move to working
with numbers and symbols at the abstract level.
General maths problem-solving interventions summary
Representation of mathematical problems
Concrete-representational-abstract approach
Word-problem solving interventions
Word problem solving involves the use of mathematics knowledge and procedure as well
as language and reading skills. All these skills can be difficult for children and young
people with different types of cognition and learning challenges.
For secondary students, the most effective interventions found for word-problem solving
were those that balance procedural instruction with conceptual understanding, and those
that offer opportunities for students to generalise their learning to meaningful, real-world
situations (Hwang & Riccomini, 2016; Myers et al., 2023). For both primary and
secondary-aged students, explicit strategy instruction, schema-based instruction and
model-based problem solving as well as technology-based interventions were effective.
Findings from a review by Myers et al. (2023) however, found that direct instruction and
diagramming instruction were not effective word problem solving performance. This could
be due to the limited number of studies investigating these techniques.
These interventions reduce cognitive load by breaking down the problem-solving process
into manageable phases, following a structured approach and explicitly teaching students
cognitive and metacognitive strategies. Common steps include stages such as read,
paraphrase, visualise, hypothesise, estimate, compute, and check, helping students
internalise these processes for automatic use in more complex problems. Strategic
prompts such as cue cards, mnemonic devices, and structured worksheets are often
used to reinforce the routine. Metacognitive strategies are also integrated to support
students in self-monitoring and regulating their thinking.
57
Word-problem solving interventions summary
Explicit strategy instruction,
Schema-based instruction
Model-based problem solving
Technology-based interventions
Reducing cognitive load with metacognitive strategies and mnemonics
Physical activity interventions
Psychomotor skills involve the brain's ability to process information and translate it into
coordinated physical actions. They skills are crucial for tasks that require both mental
planning and physical execution and are measured by gross motor skills, essential for
overall movement, coordination, balance, strength and endurance. A systematic review
by Fathi Azar et al. (2023) examined the impact of perceptual-motor exercises and
physical activity on the cognitive, motor, and academic skills of children with SpLD or
general learning difficulties. The review included ten studies with a total of 483
participants (251 intervention, 232 control) and followed PRISMA guidelines, assessing
methodological quality and risk of bias. The findings showed that perceptual-motor
interventions had a significant positive impact on cognitive skills, with seven out of eight
studies reporting improvements in working memory, attention, and information
processing speed. Various intervention types, including music training, aerobic exercises,
and perceptual-motor activities, contributed to enhanced executive functions.
Motor skills also showed notable improvements, as all five studies in Fathi Azar et al's.
(2023) review assessing this area found significant gains in fine and gross motor skills,
postural stability, and dexterity. Activities such as ball skills exercises, occupational
therapy interventions, and balance-focused training were particularly effective. In terms of
academic performance, four out of five studies demonstrated positive effects, with
interventions such as aerobic exercises and occupational therapy-based activities
leading to gains in reading, spelling, and mathematics. However, findings related to
mental health outcomes were inconsistent, with only one out of three studies reporting
improvements in self-esteem and interpersonal relationships following perceptual-motor
interventions.
Despite these promising results, the review by Fathi Azar et al. (2023) identified several
limitations. The small number of studies, moderate methodological quality, and high risk
of bias caution against overgeneralising the findings. Some studies lacked
randomisation, control groups, or standardised assessment tools, limiting the reliability of
the results. As a result, further high-quality, large-scale studies are needed to confirm the
58
long-term benefits of PM exercises for children with SpLD and general learning
difficulties. Overall, perceptual-motor exercises and physical activity appear to have a
positive impact on cognitive, motor, and academic outcomes in children with learning
disorders. However, more rigorous research is necessary to strengthen the evidence
base and clarify the role of PM interventions in mental health.
Carroll et al. (2017) summarised evidence from four studies that had investigated the
benefits of physical activity on attention and behaviour. They found that there was
evidence that regular aerobic activity can be effective in reducing poor attention and
behavioural difficulties when used alongside other interventions (which were not specified
in the original study). However, the use of fiddle toys or exercise balls as seating did not
have strong evidence.
Support and intervention summary
Children and young people with cognition and learning needs often face challenges in
areas of maths, numeracy, reading, spelling, and writing. These difficulties are
compounded by challenges in cognitive processes and executive functions. Research
has shown that effective targeted interventions can help students achieve age-
appropriate levels of academic proficiency.
Recent reviews and meta-analyses have provided growing evidence supporting the
effectiveness of various mathematics instructional approaches for students with learning
difficulties. Interventions such as peer-assisted learning, explicit teacher-led instruction,
and technology-based approaches have shown significant positive effects. However,
some challenges remain, particularly in scaling these interventions for broader
implementation, especially when delivered by teachers or teaching assistants.
For older students, cognitive-based and technology-based interventions have been
particularly effective, with cognitive-based instruction showing the largest effects.
Additionally, long-term interventions tend to yield larger effects than short-term ones.
Digital-based interventions, such as those focusing on fact fluency, also demonstrate
strong improvements in mathematics performance for students with difficulties, especially
for older learners.
Mathematics problem-solving interventions, particularly those using representation
strategies, have proven effective for students with learning difficulties. Visual, verbal, and
physical models help students better understand and solve mathematical problems,
reducing cognitive load and supporting abstract reasoning.
Research highlights the interplay of literacy skills, where struggles in areas like reading
fluency can also hinder word recognition, vocabulary development, and comprehension.
In practice, it is essential that literacy interventions are tailored to the specific needs of
59
each learner. Dyslexia, in particular, affects skills such as phonological awareness,
decoding, and phonics, which are essential for reading development. Early interventions
that target phonological awareness, phonics, and decoding processes are more impactful
at the primary level, helping to prevent later difficulties. However, ongoing support for
fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension is also necessary, particularly for older learners
who may still benefit from phonological-based interventions.
A variety of early interventions have been shown to support decoding and phonological
awareness, particularly for younger learners. These interventions often incorporate
explicit instruction, modelling, and interactive elements. Multicomponent strategies, which
address vocabulary, comprehension, and decoding together, have been found to be
particularly effective for older students with reading difficulties.
Emerging strategies, including self-regulation and motivational interventions, can also
improve literacy outcomes by fostering goal-setting and self-monitoring, which are
essential for long-term progress. Though there is considerable evidence supporting these
strategies, further research is needed, especially in understanding the optimal
combination of instructional components and exploring the effectiveness of these
approaches for different age groups and literacy difficulties.
While much of the current research has been conducted in the USA, there is a need for
studies that examine how these interventions work in diverse educational contexts.
Furthermore, more high-quality research is needed to address concerns regarding
implementation fidelity and the long-term impact of interventions.
For mathematics interventions, there was a wide range of variability in effect sizes across
studies. The small sample sizes of the included studies contributed to this variability.
Many reviews did not find significant effects when only a limited number of studies
investigated a particular intervention. Therefore, more research is needed on these
techniques, and more balanced syntheses are required. Additionally, many studies
focused on mathematics outcomes aligned with the USA curriculum, which limits the
generalisability of the findings.
Executive functioning, particularly working memory, attention, and inhibition is identified
as a key area that influences learning. However, direct interventions to improve working
memory show limited generalisation, so it is more effective to reduce cognitive load
during learning.
More research is needed to understand how to better support teachers in effectively
using reading strategies. Studies have shown that interventions tend to be more effective
when implemented by researchers rather than teachers, highlighting a gap in real-world
application. Factors such as professional development, planning time, curriculum
structure, and initial teaching quality may influence how successfully teachers implement
60
interventions, but these areas require further investigation. Sohn et al. (2023) also argued
that more high-quality research is necessary to understand how different reading
interventions work across various content areas and text types at the secondary level.
Specifically, studies should examine whether certain strategies, such as summarisation
or inferencing, are more effective for particular subjects or text structures. This is
especially important given evidence suggesting that different metacognitive strategies
may have varying impacts depending on students' age and reading needs.
To conclude, targeted and systematic mathematics interventions, particularly those
incorporating cognitive, visual, and digital strategies, can significantly improve the
mathematics outcomes for children and young people with learning difficulties. However,
further research is necessary to optimise these approaches, particularly in terms of
scaling interventions and ensuring their sustainability in diverse educational contexts.
Literacy interventions for children and young people with cognition and learning needs
should be individualised and dynamic, focusing on the specific needs of each learner.
Moreover, future research should continue to refine our understanding of how these
interventions can be effectively implemented in diverse educational contexts and across
various stages of learning.
61
Conclusions
This review aimed to identify effective methods for the identification, support, and
collaborative practices for children and young people with cognition and learning needs in
mainstream education.
The evidence reviewed highlights the crucial role that mainstream educators play in the
early identification and support of children and young people with cognition and learning
difficulties. While formal diagnosis and complex assessments require trained specialists,
classroom teachers are often the first to notice emerging challenges and initiate referrals
for further support. Teachers can use accessible screening tools, structured
observations, and informal assessments to monitor progress and identify potential needs.
However, the effectiveness of this early identification process is limited by several
factors, including inconsistent access to practical tools, variability in teacher
preparedness, and limited coverage of SEND within initial teacher training programmes.
There is a clear need to strengthen teachers' capacity through ongoing professional
development and greater access to specialist input. Collaborative working with speech
and language therapists, educational psychologists, and other professionals is also
critical in forming a complete picture of a learner's needs and tailoring appropriate
support.
In terms of intervention, the evidence base supports the use of targeted and structured
approaches to improve outcomes in literacy and mathematics for learners with cognition
and learning difficulties. In literacy, early interventions that focus on phonological
awareness, decoding, and phonics are especially effective at the primary level. For older
learners, multicomponent interventions addressing fluency, vocabulary, and
comprehension have been shown to improve reading outcomes. Additional strategies
such as metacognitive training, self-regulation, and motivational approaches can further
enhance literacy development. However, these interventions must be tailored to the
learner's individual profile and delivered consistently over time to be effective. There is
also a need for more high-quality research that evaluates these approaches across
different text types, subject areas, and age groups, particularly at the secondary level.
In mathematics, a range of instructional strategies show promise for students with
learning difficulties. Effective approaches include explicit teacher-led instruction, peer-
assisted learning, cognitive-based methods, and digital interventions, particularly those
focusing on fact fluency and representation strategies. Visual, verbal, and physical
modelling of problem-solving steps appears to support learners in navigating abstract
mathematical concepts. Nonetheless, evidence also points to persistent challenges in
scaling these interventions for widespread classroom use, especially when delivered by
non-specialist staff. Many of the available studies are small-scale and USA-based, which
limits the generalisability of findings to other contexts, including the UK.
62
A recurring theme across both literacy and mathematics is the importance of reducing
cognitive load during instruction. While interventions targeting executive functions such
as working memory have shown limited direct generalisation, strategies that structure
learning and provide scaffolding appear more effective. Interventions also tend to yield
better outcomes when delivered by researchers or highly trained specialists, rather than
general teaching staff, suggesting a need for improved support and training for teachers
in implementation.
To conclude, while there is strong evidence supporting a range of structured, targeted
interventions for learners with cognition and learning difficulties, effective implementation
depends on multiple factors. These include sufficient teacher training, access to
appropriate tools and resources, interdisciplinary collaboration, and sustained
professional development. Interventions must be individualised, developmentally
appropriate, and feasible for use in mainstream settings. Future research should focus on
understanding how to optimise the delivery of these strategies in diverse educational
environments and across different stages of learning.
63
Appendices
Appendix A: Search terms (PICOS criteria)
We conducted 15 separate searches across five rapid review categories, each focused
on a distinct population: SEMH, SLCN, autism, sensory and/or physical needs, and
cognition and learning. For each population, three searches were performed, focusing
on: identification terms, support terms, and working with others. The intervention,
comparison, and study type remained consistent across all searches, while the
population and outcome terms varied to capture the unique characteristics of each group.
This approach ensured a comprehensive examination of the research literature across
the different populations. PICOS stands for: (1) Population; (2) Intervention; (3)
Comparison; (4) Outcomes; and (5) Study type.
Population:
Population terms: "adolescent" OR child* OR "children and young people" OR kid*
OR "post 16" OR pupil* OR "school aged" OR student* OR teen* OR "young
learner*" OR "young people" OR "young person" OR youth
Educational setting terms: "alternat* educat*" OR class* OR "class* setting" OR
"comprehensive school*" OR "early year*" OR educat* OR elementary OR
"elementary school*" OR "extra-curricular setting*" OR "further educat*" OR
"further educat* setting*" OR "grammar school*" OR "high school" OR "higher
educat*" OR inclus* OR kindergarten OR "learning environment*" OR mainstream*
OR "middle school*" OR nursery OR preschool OR "primary educat*" OR "primary
school*" OR reception OR "remedi* class*" OR "school setting" OR school* OR
"secondary education*" OR "secondary school*" OR "special educat*" OR
"university" OR "whole school" OR "independent school"
General SEND terms: SEND OR SEN OR "special educat* need*" OR "special
need*" OR "learning difficult*" OR "learning disab*" OR "learning difference" OR
"additional need*" OR impair* OR disorder* OR neurodivergent OR "additional
learning need"
Cognition and learning terms: DCD OR SpLD OR attention OR "cogniti* difficult*"
OR "development* disab*" OR "developmental co-ordination disorder" OR
dyscalcul* OR dyslexi* OR dyspraxia OR "general learning difficult*" OR
"handwriting difficult*" OR "handwriting impair*" OR "learning difficult*" OR "literacy
difficult*" OR "math* anxiety" OR "math* difficult*" OR "mild learning difficult*"
"moderate learning difficult*" OR "numeracy difficult*" OR "profound and multiple
learning difficult*" OR "reading difficult*" OR "reading impair*" OR "severe learning
64
difficult*" OR "specific learning difficult*" OR "specific learning disab*" OR "writing
difficult*"
Intervention:
Identification terms: assess* OR "assessment app*" OR "assessment tools" OR
"behavio* checklist*" OR checklist OR "class* assess*" OR "classroom
observation" OR "cognitive assess*" OR "computer* app" OR "curriculum-based
measure" OR diagnos* OR "dynamic assessment" OR "early screening tools" OR
"educational assessment tool*" OR evaluate OR "formal assess*" OR "formative
assess*" OR "graduated approach" OR identif* OR "informal assess*" OR
measure OR "multi-disciplinary assessment" OR MTSS OR "multi-tiered system of
supports" OR "neuro* assess*" OR observ* OR "parent* report" OR "pupil
observation" OR "response to intervention" OR RTI OR screen* OR "self-
assessment" OR "self-report" OR "smartphone app*" OR "standard* test*" OR
"student observation" OR "tablet app*" OR "teacher judgment*" OR "teacher
observation" OR tool* OR "performance-based"
Support terms: "classroom environment" OR "SEN support" OR "SEND support"
OR SWPBS OR accommodat* OR adaptat* OR approach OR "assistive tech*" OR
"classroom interve*" OR "collaborative teach*" OR curriculum OR "curriculum
adapt*" OR "differentiat* instruction" OR "digital learning" OR "early interven*" OR
"education* program*" OR "education* support" OR "evidence-based interven*"
OR "evidence-informed interven*" OR "exam access arrangement*" OR "exam
accommodat*" OR "graduated approach" OR "group intervention" OR "high-quality
instruct*" OR "high-quality teach*" OR inclus* OR "inclusive education" OR
"inclusive practice" OR "individual support" OR "individual* education plan*" OR
"instruct*" OR interven* OR integrat* OR "mainstream class* support" OR
"mainstream education" OR "mainstream environment" OR "multimedia learning
environment" OR "multi-tiered system* of support" OR "one-to-one" OR "parental
support" OR pedagog* OR "peer support" OR personali*ed OR provision OR
remediat OR "school support service*" OR "school-based" OR "special* interven*"
OR "special* support" OR "specialist teach* support" OR support* OR strateg* OR
"targeted interven*" OR "target* teach* strateg*" OR targeted OR "targeted
support" OR teach* OR "teach* adaptation*" OR "teach* principle*" OR "teach*
strateg*" OR "teach* approach" OR therapy OR "tier 1 interven*" OR "tier 1
support" OR "tier 2 interve*" OR "tier 2 support" OR "tier 3 interven*" OR "tier 3
support" OR treat* OR "universal design" OR "universal interven*" OR "universal
provision" OR "universal support" OR "whole-class support" OR "whole-class
teaching"
Working with others terms: collabor* OR parent* OR carer OR caregiver OR famil*
OR specialist* OR "specialist teacher" OR teacher OR educator OR TA OR
"teaching assistant*" OR "support staff" OR "educational psychologist*" OR EP OR
65
SLT or SLP or "speech and language therapist*" OR "speech and language
pathologist*" OR "speech therapist" OR "speech pathologist" OR "health visitor"
OR HV* OR "Ed Psych" OR counsel* OR "mental health support workers" OR
"child and adolescent mental health service" OR CAHMS OR psychologist* or
therapist* OR "learning support assistant" OR LSA OR "communication support
worker" OR QTOD OR QTMSI OR QTVI OR "co-production" OR "joint working"
OR "healthcare professional" OR "personal carer" OR "occupational therapist"
"Inter-professional collaboration" OR IPC OR expert OR clinician OR nurse
Comparison:
Left blank to include studies without comparison groups
Outcome:
Identification terms: N/A - Not needed for identification terms as there is not
always a specific outcome
Behavioural, Inclusion, Motivation, and Engagement terms: attendance OR
"behavio* outcomes" OR "behavio* regulation" OR "behavio* improvement" OR
"cognitive development" OR "communication skills" OR criminal OR economic OR
employment OR engage* OR financial OR "functional independence" OR
"functional skills development" OR "access to learning" OR "improvement in
learning" OR "inclusive classroom" OR "increase* inclusion" OR "independent
living" OR independent* OR "mental health outcomes" OR motivate* OR offend
OR "prosocial behavio* OR "reduce* learning barriers" OR "reduce* symptom*"
OR "self-regulat*" OR "school performance" OR "school retention" OR "social
inclusion" OR "social-emotional development" OR "teacher perceptions of student
progress" OR "well-being" OR workplace
Educational outcomes (General): "academic achievement" OR "academic
progress*" OR "academic attainment" OR "academic measure" OR "academic
performance" OR "additional learning support*" OR "educat* achievement" OR
"educat* assess*" OR "educat* attainment" OR "educat* measure" OR "educat*
outcome*" OR "educat* performance" OR "educat* progress" "executive function*"
OR "functional skill* develop*' OR "improve* learning" OR learn* OR "learning
progress" OR "problem solving" OR "reduced learning barriers" OR "school
outcome*" OR "school performance" OR "school retention"
Literacy outcomes: read* OR literacy OR "letter recognition" OR "letter-sound
knowledge" OR "word reading" OR phonic* OR phonolog* OR "reading
comprehension" OR "reading accuracy" OR "reading fluency" OR "reading delay*"
OR "print knowledge" OR decod* OR "alphabet knowledge" OR "listening
comprehension" OR "word recognition" OR "sentence completion"
66
Writing outcomes: writ* OR literacy OR punctuation OR spelling OR "sentence
writing" OR "free writing" OR "early writing" OR "emergent writing" OR "guided
writing" OR "writing fluency" OR handwriting OR "interactive writing" OR "letter
typing" OR "sentence completion"
Mathematics outcomes: math* OR numer* OR numb* "number sense" OR
arithmetic* OR geomet* OR shape OR calcul* OR algebra OR counting OR
addition OR subtraction OR multiplication OR division OR fractions OR statistics*
OR "place value" OR "math* competenc*" OR "math* concept*" OR "math*
knowledge"
Working with others terms: collaboration* or partnership* or co-practice* or
multidisciplinary* or transdisciplinary or interdisciplinary
Study type:
Review type: review OR "systematic review" OR "meta-analysis" OR "narrative
review"
67
References
*Indicated studies retrieved in rapid review
AHMED, Y., WAGNER, R.K. AND LOPEZ, D., 2014. Developmental relations between
reading and writing at the word, sentence, and text levels: a latent change score
analysis. Journal of educational psychology, 106(2), p.419.
AL OTAIBA, S. AND FUCHS, D., 2002. Characteristics of children who are unresponsive
to early literacy intervention: A review of the literature. Remedial and Special
education, 23(5), pp.300-316.
*ALQURAINI, T.A. & RAO, S.M., 2020. Developing and sustaining readers with
intellectual and multiple disabilities: A systematic review of literature. International
Journal of Developmental Disabilities, 66(2), pp.91-103.
ANDERSSON, U., 2008. Mathematical competencies in children with different types of
learning difficulties. Journal of Educational Psychology, 100(1), p.48.
ANDERSSON, A., 2010. Can a critical pedagogy in mathematics lead to achievement,
engagement and social empowerment. Philosophy of Mathematics Education
Journal, 25, pp. 1-25.
APEL, K., 2014. A comprehensive definition of morphological awareness: Implications for
assessment. Topics in Language Disorders, 34(3), pp.197-209.
APEL, K. AND DIEHM, E., 2014. Morphological awareness intervention with
kindergarteners and first and second grade students from low SES homes: A small
efficacy study. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 47(1), pp.65-75.
ASH, G.E., KUHN, M.R. AND WALPOLE, S., 2008. Analyzing "inconsistencies" in
practice: Teachers' continued use of round robin reading. Reading & Writing
Quarterly, 25(1), pp.87-103.
BADDELEY, A., 2020. Working memory. Memory, pp.71-111.
*BENAVIDES-VARELA, S., ZANDONELLA CALLEGHER, C., FAGIOLINI, B., LEO, I.,
ALTOE, G. & LUCANGELI, D., 2020. Effectiveness of digital-based interventions for
children with mathematical learning difficulties: A meta-analysis. Computers &
Education, 157, pp.1-15.
*BERKELEY, S. & LARSEN, A., 2018. Fostering self-regulation of students with learning
disabilities: Insights from 30 years of reading comprehension intervention research.
Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 33(2), pp.75-86.
68
BERNINGER, V.W. AND AMTMANN, D., 2003. Preventing written expression disabilities
through early and continuing assessment and intervention for handwriting and/or
spelling problems: Research into practice.
BIANCAROSA, G. AND SNOW, C.E., 2004. Reading next: A vision for action and
research in middle and high school literacy: A report from Carnegie Corporation of
New York. Alliance for Excellent Education.
BISHOP, D.V. AND SNOWLING, M.J., 2004. Developmental dyslexia and specific
language impairment: Same or different?. Psychological bulletin, 130(6), p.858.
*BOON, R.T., PAAL, M., HINTZ, A.-M. & CORNELIUS-FREYRE, M., 2015. A review of
story mapping instruction for secondary students with LD. Learning Disabilities: A
Contemporary Journal, 13(2), pp.117-140.
BORMUTH, J.R., 1968. Readability in 1968.
BOTTING, N., SIMKIN, Z. AND CONTI-RAMSDEN, G., 2006. Associated reading skills in
children with a history of specific language impairment (SLI). Reading and
writing, 19(1), pp.77-98.
*BOUCHER, A.N., BHAT, B.H., CLEMENS, N.H., VAUGHN, S. & O'DONNELL, K., 2024.
Reading interventions for students in grades 3-12 with significant word reading
difficulties. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 57(4), pp.203-223.
*BOWMAN, J.A., MCDONNELL, J., RYAN, J.H. & FUDGE-COLEMAN, O., 2019.
Effective mathematics instruction for students with moderate and severe disabilities:
A review of the literature. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities,
34(4), pp. 195-204.
*BRADY, S. & MASON, L.H., 2024. A literature review of morphological awareness
interventions and the effects on literacy outcomes. Learning Disability Quarterly,
47(1), pp. 16-29.
*BRAY, L., SKUBIK-PEPLASKI, C. & ACKERMAN, K.B., 2021. A systematic review of
the effectiveness of interventions to improve handwriting and spelling in children
with specific learning disabilities. Journal of Occupational Therapy, Schools, & Early
Intervention.
BREADMORE, H.L., VARDY, E., CUNNINGHAM, A.J., KWOK, R.K. AND CARROLL,
J.M., 2019. Literacy development: Evidence review.
BRIMO, D., 2016. Evaluating the effectiveness of a morphological awareness
intervention: A pilot study. Communication Disorders Quarterly, 38(1), pp.35-45.
69
BRITISH DYSLEXIA ASSOCIATION. (N.D.). How to identify dyscalculia and maths
learning difficulties. Retrieved 13 February 2025, from
https://www.bdadyslexia.org.uk/dyscalculia/how-can-i-identfy-dyscalculia
BUTTERWORTH, B., 2010. Foundational numerical capacities and the origins of
dyscalculia. Trends in cognitive sciences, 14(12), pp.534-541.
CARLISLE, J.F., 2000. Awareness of the structure and meaning of morphologically
complex words: Impact on reading. Reading and writing, 12(3), pp.169-190.
*CARROLL, J., BRADLEY, L., CRAWFORD, H., HANNANT, P., JOHNSON, H. AND
THOMPSON, A., 2017. SEN support: A rapid evidence assessment. Department for
Education.
CARROLL, J.M., HOLDEN, C., KIRBY, P., THOMPSON, P.A., SNOWLING, M.J.,
DYSLEXIA DELPHI PANEL, BAGSHAW, S., BRACKENBURY, G., BRIGSTOCKE,
S., CASTIGLIONE, L. AND DAULBY, B., 2025. Toward a consensus on dyslexia:
findings from a Delphi study. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 66(7),
pp.1065-1076.
CARROLL, J.M., SOLITY, J. AND SHAPIRO, L.R., 2016. Predicting dyslexia using
prereading skills: The role of sensorimotor and cognitive abilities. Journal of child
psychology and psychiatry, 57(6), pp.750-758.
CATTS, H.W., HERRERA, S., NIELSEN, D.C. AND BRIDGES, M.S., 2015. Early
prediction of reading comprehension within the simple view framework. Reading
and Writing, 28(9), pp.1407-1425.
CASTLES, A., RASTLE, K. AND NATION, K., 2018. Ending the reading wars: Reading
acquisition from novice to expert. Psychological science in the public interest, 19(1),
pp.5-51.
CEPEDA, N. J., PASHLER, H., VUL, E., WIXTED, J. T. & ROHRER, D., 2006.
Distributed practice in verbal recall tasks: A review and quantitative synthesis.
Psychological Bulletin, 132(3), 354-380.
CHARD, D.J., VAUGHN, S. AND TYLER, B.J., 2002. A synthesis of research on effective
interventions for building reading fluency with elementary students with learning
disabilities. Journal of learning disabilities, 35(5), pp.386-406.
CHATZAKI, A., KARAKOLIDIS, A., TZEKAKI, M. & VOSNIADOU, S., 2024. House of
Numbers (HoN): A new tool for assessing symbolic and non-symbolic number
sense in early education. Early Child Development and Care. [In press].
70
*CHO, E., DAHL-LEONARD, K., KEHOE, K., CAPIN, P., HALL, C. & SOLARI, E., 2023.
Motivational practices in reading interventions for students with or at risk for
dyslexia: Literature synthesis and meta-analysis. Topics in Language Disorders,
43(2), pp.119-145.
CHONG, S.L. AND SIEGEL, L.S., 2008. Stability of computational deficits in math
learning disability from second through fifth grades. Developmental
Neuropsychology, 33(3), pp.300-317.
CIRINO, P.T., FLETCHER, J.M., EWING-COBBS, L., BARNES, M.A. AND FUCHS, L.S.,
2007. Cognitive arithmetic differences in learning difficulty groups and the role of
behavioral inattention. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 22(1), pp.25-35.
*CLARK, G.T. & REUTERSKIÖLD, C., 2021. Orthographic support for word learning in
clinical populations: A systematic review. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services
in Schools, 52(3), pp.937-948.
CLEMENTS, D.H., SARAMA, J.H. AND LIU, X.H., 2008. Development of a measure of
early mathematics achievement using the Rasch model: The Research-Based Early
Maths Assessment. Educational Psychology, 28(4), pp.457-482.
CLARKE, B., GERSTEN, R.M., DIMINO, J. AND ROLFHUS, E., 2011. Assessing student
proficiency of number sense (ASPENS). Longmont, CO: Cambium Learning Group,
Sopris Learning.
*COLLINS, A.A., LINDSTRÖM, E.R. AND COMPTON, D.L., 2018. Comparing students
with and without reading difficulties on reading comprehension assessments: A
meta-analysis. Journal of learning disabilities, 51(2), pp.108-123.
*COZAD, L.E. & RICCOMINI, P.J., 2016. Effects of digital-based math fluency
interventions on learners with math difficulties: A review of the literature. Journal of
Special Education Apprenticeship, 5(2).
CRAGG, L., KEEBLE, S., RICHARDSON, S., ROOME, H.E. AND GILMORE, C., 2017.
Direct and indirect influences of executive functions on mathematics
achievement. Cognition, 162, pp. 12-26.
*CRUZ, A.M., RINCON, A.M.R., DUENAS, W.R.R., TORRES, D.A.Q. & BOHORQUEZ-
HEREDIA, A.F., 2017. What does the literature say about using robots on children
with disabilities? Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, 12(5), pp.429-
440.
DAVID, C.V., 2012. Working memory deficits in math learning difficulties: A meta-
analysis. International Journal of Developmental Disabilities, 58(2), pp.67-84.
71
*DANIEL, J. & WILLIAMS, K.J., 2021. Self-questioning strategy for struggling readers: A
synthesis. Remedial and Special Education, 42(4), pp.248-261.
*DENNIS, M.S., SHARP, E., CHOVANES, J., THOMAS, A., BURNS, R.M., CUSTER, B.
& PARK, J., 2016. A meta-analysis of empirical research on teaching students with
mathematics learning difficulties. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 31(3),
pp.156-168.
DENO, S.L., 2014. Whether thou goest.. Perspectives on progress monitoring. In Issues
in educating students with disabilities (pp. 77-99). Routledge.
DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION & DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE.
(2015). Special educational needs and disability code of practice: 0 to 25 years
(Updated 2020). GOV.UK. Retrieved 13 February 2025, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-code-of-practice-0-to-25
Department for Education. (2022). SEND Review: Right support, right place, right
time. UK Government. Retrieved 13 February 2025, from
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications
DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION. (2024). Suspensions and permanent exclusions in
England: 2023-24 (Autumn term). UK Government. Retrieved 13 February 2025,
from https://explore-education-statistics.service.gov.uk/find-statistics/suspensions-
and-permanent-exclusions-in-england/2023-24-autumn-term
DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION. (2025). Special educational needs in England: 2024-
25. UK Government. Retrieved 13 February 2025, from https://explore-education-
statistics.service.gov.uk/find-statistics/special-educational-needs-in-england/2024-
25
*DIDION, L., TOSTE, J.R., BENZ, S.A. & SHOGREN, K.A., 2021. How are self-
determination components taught to improve reading outcomes for elementary
students with or at risk for learning disabilities? Learning Disability Quarterly, 44(4),
pp.288-303.
*DIXON, C., OXLEY, E., NASH, H. AND GELLERT, A.S., 2023. Does dynamic
assessment offer an alternative approach to identifying reading disorder? A
systematic review. Journal of learning disabilities, 56(6), pp.423-439.
DIXON, C., THOMSON, J. AND FRICKE, S., 2020. Language and reading development
in children learning English as an additional language in primary school in
England. Journal of Research in Reading, 43(3), pp.309-328.
72
DOCKRELL, J.E. AND SHIELD, B.M., 2006. Acoustical barriers in classrooms: the
impact of noise on performance in the classroom. British educational research
journal, 32(3), pp.509-525.
*DOMINGUEZ-GONZÁLEZ, M.A., HERVÁS-GÓMEZ, C. & ROMÁN-GRAVÁN, P., 2023.
Technologies as a support resource for people with disabilities: A systematic
review. Journal of Turkish Science Education, 20(4), pp.619-631.
EHRI, L.C., NUNES, S.R., WILLOWS, D.M., SCHUSTER, B.V., YAGHOUB-ZADEH, Z.
AND SHANAHAN, T., 2001. Phonemic awareness instruction helps children learn to
read: Evidence from the National Reading Panel's meta-analysis. Reading research
quarterly, 36(3), pp.250-287.
ENGELMANN, S., 1983. Reading mastery IV. Atlantic Books, Limited.
ERFORD, B.T., BAGLEY, D.L., HOPPER, J.A., LEE, R.M., PANAGOPULOS, K.A. AND
PRELLER, D.B., 1998. Reliability and validity of the Math Essential Skill Screener-
Elementary Version (MESS-E). Psychology in the Schools, 35(2), pp. 127-135.
*FAGGELLA-LUBY, M.N., DREW, S.V. & SCHUMAKER, J.B., 2015. Not such a simple
story: Contradictory evidence from a review of story structure research for students
at risk. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 30(2), pp.61-75.
FOGARTY, M., OSLUND, E., SIMMONS, D., DAVIS, J., SIMMONS, L., ANDERSON, L.,
CLEMENS, N. AND ROBERTS, G., 2014. Examining the effectiveness of a
multicomponent reading comprehension intervention in middle schools: A focus on
treatment fidelity. Educational Psychology Review, 26(3), pp.425-449.
FUCHS, D. AND FUCHS, L.S., 2006. Introduction to response to intervention: What,
why, and how valid is it?. Reading research quarterly, 41(1), pp.93-99.
FUCHS, L.S., FUCHS, D., POWELL, S.R., SEETHALER, P.M., CIRINO, P.T. AND
FLETCHER, J.M., 2008. Intensive intervention for students with mathematics
disabilities: Seven principles of effective practice. Learning Disability
Quarterly, 31(2), pp.79-92.
GARCÍA, J.R. AND CAIN, K., 2014. Decoding and reading comprehension: A meta-
analysis to identify which reader and assessment characteristics influence the
strength of the relationship in English. Review of educational research, 84(1), pp.74-
111.
GARRITTY, C., HAMEL, C., TRIVELLA, M., GARTLEHNER, G., NUSSBAUMER-
STREIT, B., DEVANE, D., KAMEL, C., GRIEBLER, U. AND KING, V.J., 2024.
73
Updated recommendations for the Cochrane rapid review methods guidance for
rapid reviews of effectiveness. bmj, 384.
GATHERCOLE, S.E., WOOLGAR, F., KIEVIT, R.A., ASTLE, D., MANLY, T., HOLMES,
J. AND CALM TEAM, 2016. How common are WM deficits in children with
difficulties in reading and mathematics?. Journal of applied research in memory and
cognition, 5(4), pp.384-394.
GEARY, D.C., 1993. Mathematical disabilities: cognitive, neuropsychological, and
genetic components. Psychological bulletin, 114(2), p.345.
GEARY, D.C., HOARD, M.K. AND BAILEY, D.H., 2012. Fact retrieval deficits in low
achieving children and children with mathematical learning disability. Journal of
learning disabilities, 45(4), pp.291-307.
GEARY, D.C., HOARD, M.K., NUGENT, L. AND BAILEY, D.H., 2013. Adolescents'
functional numeracy is predicted by their school entry number system
knowledge. PloS one, 8(1), p.e54651.
*GOLDFELD, S., BEATSON, R., WATTS, A., SNOW, P., GOLD, L., LE, H.N.D.,
EDWARDS, S., CONNELL, J., STARK, H., SHINGLES, B., BARNETT, T., QUACH,
J. & EADIE, P., 2022. Tier 2 oral language and early reading interventions for
preschool to grade 2 children: A restricted systematic review. Australian Journal of
Learning Difficulties, 27(1), pp.65-113.
GOLDSTEIN, H., KELLEY, E., GREENWOOD, C., MCCUNE, L., CARTA, J., ATWATER,
J., GUERRERO, G., MCCARTHY, T., SCHNEIDER, N. AND SPENCER, T., 2016.
Embedded instruction improves vocabulary learning during automated storybook
reading among high-risk preschoolers. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 59(3), pp.484-500.
GOOD, J.E., LANCE, D.M. AND RAINEY, J., 2015. The effects of morphological
awareness training on reading, spelling, and vocabulary skills. Communication
Disorders Quarterly, 36(3), pp.142-151.
*GUO, D., FENG, L. AND HODGES, T.S., 2023. Differentiating reading profiles of
children with specific comprehension deficits from skilled readers: A systematic
review. Learning Disability Quarterly, 46(2), pp. 134-146.
HALL, M.S. AND BURNS, M.K., 2018. Meta-analysis of targeted small-group reading
interventions. Journal of School Psychology, 66, pp.54-66.
74
*HALL, C., STEINLE, P.K. & VAUGHN, S., 2019. Reading instruction for English learners
with learning disabilities: What do we already know, and what do we still need to
learn? New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 166, pp. 145-189.
*HALL-MILLS, S.S. & MARANTE, L.M., 2022. Explicit text structure instruction supports
expository text comprehension for adolescents with learning disabilities: A
systematic review. Learning Disability Quarterly, 45(1), pp.55-68.
HATTIE, J., 2008. Visible learning: A synthesis of over 800 meta-analyses relating to
achievement. routledge.
HAWES, Z., MOSS, J., CASWELL, B., SEO, J. AND ANSARI, D., 2019. Relations
between numerical, spatial, and executive function skills and mathematics
achievement: A latent-variable approach. Cognitive Psychology, 109, pp.68-90.
*HOLMAN, K., 2023. Interventions for students with developmental dyscalculia: A
systematic literature review. Insights into Learning Disabilities, 20(2), pp. 135-151.
HOOVER, W.A. AND GOUGH, P.B., 1990. The simple view of reading. Reading and
writing, 2(2), pp.127-160.
HOWARD, S.J. AND MELHUISH, E., 2017. An early years toolbox for assessing early
executive function, language, self-regulation, and social development: Validity,
reliability, and preliminary norms. Journal of psychoeducational assessment, 35(3),
pp.255-275.
*HWANG, J. & RICCOMINI, P.J., 2016. Enhancing mathematical problem solving for
secondary students with or at risk of learning disabilities: A literature review.
Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 31(3), pp.169-181.
*JIANG, Y., WANG, Q. & WENG, Z., 2022. The influence of technology in educating
English language learners at-risk or with disabilities: A systematic review. Center for
Educational Policy Studies Journal, 12(4), pp.53-74.
*JITENDRA, A.K., NELSON, G. & PULLES, S.M., 2016. Is mathematical representation
of problems an evidence-based strategy for students with mathematics difficulties?
Exceptional Children, 83(1), pp. 17-25.
*JITENDRA, A.K., LEIN, A.E., IM, S.-H., ALGHAMDI, A.A., HEFTE, S.B. &
MOUANOUTOUA, J., 2018. Mathematical interventions for secondary students with
learning disabilities and mathematics difficulties: A meta-analysis. Exceptional
Children, 84(2), pp.177-196.
JOHNSTON, R. AND WATSON, J., 2007. Teaching synthetic phonics. Learning Matters.
75
JORDAN, N.C., GLUTTING, J. & RAMINENI, C., 2010. The Number Sense Screener
(NSS): A test for identifying young children at risk for mathematics difficulties.
Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment, 28(4), pp.295-307.
JORDAN, T.R., THOMAS, S.M., PATCHING, G.R. AND SCOTT-BROWN, K.C., 2003.
Assessing the importance of letter pairs in initial, exterior, and interior positions in
reading. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 29(5), p.883.
JUST, M.A. AND CARPENTER, P.A., 1992. A capacity theory of comprehension:
individual differences in working memory. Psychological review, 99(1), p.122.
*KALDENBERG, E.R., WATT, S.J. & THERRIEN, W.J., 2015. Reading instruction in
science for students with learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 38(3),
pp.160-173.
KELLY, N. AND NORWICH, B., 2013. Moderate learning difficulties and the future of
inclusion. Routledge.
*KILGUS, S.P., EKLUND, K., MAGGIN, D.M., TAYLOR, C.N. AND ALLEN, A.N., 2018.
The Student Risk Screening Scale: A reliability and validity generalization meta-
analysis. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 26(3), pp.143-155.
*KIM, S.J. & XIN, Y.P., 2022. A synthesis of computer-assisted mathematical word
problem-solving instruction for students with learning disabilities or difficulties.
Learning Disabilities: A Contemporary Journal, 20(1), pp.27-45.
KIRBY, J.R., DEACON, S.H., BOWERS, P.N., IZENBERG, L., WADE-WOOLLEY, L.
AND PARRILA, R., 2012. Children's morphological awareness and reading
ability. Reading and writing, 25(2), pp.389-410.
KIRBY, J.R. AND SAVAGE, R.S., 2008. Can the simple view deal with the complexities
of reading?. Literacy, 42(2), pp.75-82.
KIRK, C. AND GILLON, G.T., 2009. Integrated morphological awareness intervention as
a tool for improving literacy. Language, speech, and hearing services in
schools, 40(3), pp.341-351.
KOHNEN, S., NICKELS, L. AND CASTLES, A., 2009. Assessing spelling skills and
strategies: A critique of available resources. Australian journal of learning
difficulties, 14(1), pp.113-150.
KOVAS, Y., HAWORTH, C.M., PETRILL, S.A. AND PLOMIN, R., 2007. Mathematical
ability of 10-year-old boys and girls: genetic and environmental etiology of typical
and low performance. Journal of learning disabilities, 40(6), pp.554-567.
76
*KRANZ, A.E., SERRY, T.A. AND SNOW, P.C., 2024. Twice-exceptionality unmasked: A
systematic narrative review of the literature on identifying dyslexia in the gifted
child. Dyslexia, 30(1), p.e1763.
*KUCUKALKAN, K., BEYAZSACLI, M. & OZ, A.S., 2019. Examination of the effects of
computer-based mathematics instruction methods in children with mathematical
learning difficulties: A meta-analysis. Behaviour & Information Technology, 38(9),
pp.913-923.
*KUDER, S.J., 2017. Vocabulary instruction for secondary students with reading
disabilities: An updated research review. Learning Disability Quarterly, 40(3),
pp. 155-164.
LAM, E.A. AND MCMASTER, K.L., 2014. Predictors of responsiveness to early literacy
intervention: A 10-year update. Learning Disability Quarterly, 37(3), pp.134-147.
LANDERL, K., BEVAN, A. AND BUTTERWORTH, B., 2004. Developmental dyscalculia
and basic numerical capacities: A study of 8-9-year-old students. Cognition, 93(2),
pp.99-125.
LANDERL, K. AND MOLL, K., 2010. Comorbidity of learning disorders: prevalence and
familial transmission. Journal of child psychology and psychiatry, 51(3), pp.287-294.
LEE, J. & YOON, S.Y., 2017. The effects of repeated reading on reading fluency for
students with reading disabilities: A meta-analysis. Journal of Learning Disabilities,
50(2), pp.213-224.
LEE, Y. & DE LA PAZ, S., 2021. Science writing intervention research for students with
and at risk for learning disabilities, and English learners: A systematic review.
Learning Disability Quarterly, 44(4), pp.261-274.
LESH, R., POST, T.R. AND BEHR, M., 1987. Representations and translations among
representations in mathematics learning and problem solving. In Problems of
representations in the teaching and learning of mathematics (pp. 33-40). Lawrence
Erlbaum.
LEVESQUE, K.C., BREADMORE, H.L. AND DEACON, S.H., 2021. How morphology
impacts reading and spelling: Advancing the role of morphology in models of
literacy development. Journal of Research in Reading, 44(1), pp. 10-26.
LIN, X., MULLIGAN, J.T. & MITCHELMORE, M., 2021. Parent Ratings of Numeracy
Skills: A questionnaire for parents of preschool children. Early Childhood Research
Quarterly, 54, pp.75-85.
77
LONIGAN, C.J. AND PHILLIPS, B.M., 2016. Response to instruction in preschool:
Results of two randomized studies with children at significant risk of reading
difficulties. Journal of educational psychology, 108(1), p.114.
*LOUICK, R., EMERY, A., MUENKS, K. & O'GRADY, M., 2023. Attending to motivation
during vocabulary interventions for students with or at risk for learning disabilities: A
review of the literature. Topics in Language Disorders, 43(2), pp.97-118.
LOVETT, M.W., BORDEN, S.L., DELUCA, T., LACERENZA, L., BENSON, N.J. AND
BRACKSTONE, D., 1994. Treating the core deficits of developmental dyslexia:
Evidence of transfer of learning after phonologically-and strategy-based reading
training programs. Developmental psychology, 30(6), p.805.
*MAK, C., WHITTINGHAM, K., CUNNINGTON, R. & BOYD, R.N., 2018. Efficacy of
mindfulness-based interventions for attention and executive function in children and
adolescents: A systematic review. Mindfulness, 9(1), pp.59-78.
*MATRE, M.E. & CAMERON, D.L., 2024. A scoping review on the use of speech-to-text
technology for adolescents with learning difficulties in secondary education.
Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, 19(3), pp.1103-1116.
MAUGHAN, B., MESSER, J., COLLISHAW, S., PICKLES, A., SNOWLING, M., YULE, W.
AND RUTTER, M., 2009. Persistence of literacy problems: spelling in adolescence
and at mid-life. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 50(8), pp.893-901.
MAZZOCCO, M.M., DEVLIN, K.T. AND MCKENNEY, S.J., 2008. Is it a fact? Timed
arithmetic performance of children with mathematical learning disabilities (MLD)
varies as a function of how MLD is defined. Developmental neuropsychology, 33(3),
pp.318-344.
MCBREEN, M. AND SAVAGE, R., 2021. The impact of motivational reading instruction
on the reading achievement and motivation of students: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Educational psychology review, 33(3), pp.1125-1163.
MCINTOSH, K. AND GOODMAN, S., 2016. Integrated multi-tiered systems of support:
Blending RTI and PBIS. Guilford Publications.
MELBY-LERVÁG, M. AND HULME, C., 2013. Is working memory training effective? A
meta-analytic review. Developmental psychology, 49(2), p.270.
MELBY-LERVAG, M., REDICK, T.S. AND HULME, C., 2016. Working memory training
does not improve performance on measures of intelligence or other measures of
"far transfer" evidence from a meta-analytic review. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 11(4), pp.512-534.
78
*MIZE, M., PARK, Y. & MARTIN, M., 2023. Technology-assisted reading fluency
interventions for students with reading difficulties: Evidence from a meta-analytic
approach of single case design studies. Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive
Technology, 18(8), pp. 1544-1554.
MORSANYI, K., VAN BERS, B.M., MCCORMACK, T. AND MCGOURTY, J., 2018. The
prevalence of specific learning disorder in mathematics and comorbidity with other
developmental disorders in primary school-age children. British Journal of
Psychology, 109(4), pp.917-940.
*MYERS, J.A., BROWNELL, M.T., GRIFFIN, C.C., HUGHES, E.M., WITZEL, B.S.,
GAGE, N.A., PEYTON, D. & ACOSTA, K., 2021. Mathematics interventions for
adolescents with mathematics difficulties: A meta-analysis. Learning Disabilities
Research & Practice, 36(2), pp. 145-166.
*MYERS, J.A., HUGHES, E.M., WITZEL, B.S., ANDERSON, R.D. & OWENS, J., 2023. A
meta-analysis of mathematical interventions for increasing the word problem-solving
performance of upper elementary and secondary students with mathematics
difficulties. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 16(1), pp.35-55.
NATIONAL READING PANEL (US), NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF CHILD HEALTH AND
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT (US), 2000. Teaching children to read: An evidence-
based assessment of the scientific research literature on reading and its
implications for reading instruction: Reports of the subgroups. National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health.
NEALE, M. D. (1958). Neale Analysis of Reading Ability. London: Macmillan.
NEALE, M. D. (1997). Neale Analysis of Reading Ability - Revised. Windsor: NFER-
Nelson.
NEALE, M. D., CHRISTOPHERS, U., & WHETTON, C. (1989). Neale Analysis of
Reading Ability -Revised British Edition. Windsor: NFER-Nelson
*NELSON-STROUTS, K., GILLISPIE, W.M. AND BRIDGES, M., 2020. The Use of
Dynamic Assessment in the Evaluation of Early Literacy Skills. EBP Briefs. Volume
14, Issue 4. EBP Briefs (Evidence-based Practice Briefs).
*NILVIUS, C., CARLSSON, R., FÄLTH, L. & NORDSTRÖM, T., 2021. Tier 2
interventions within the Rtl-model for developing students' word decoding: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Cogent Education, 8(1), p. 1939536.
NORBURY, C.F., VAMVAKAS, G., GOOCH, D., BAIRD, G., CHARMAN, T., SIMONOFF,
E. AND PICKLES, A., 2017. Language growth in children with heterogeneous
79
language disorders: a population study. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 58(10), pp.1092-1105.
OUTHWAITE, L.A., AUNIO, P., LEUNG, J.K.Y. AND VAN HERWEGEN, J., 2024.
Measuring mathematical skills in early childhood: A systematic review of the
psychometric properties of early maths assessments and screeners. Educational
Psychology Review, 36(4), p.110.
*PARK, J., BOUCK, E.C. & JOSOL, C.K., 2020. Target selection in speech therapy: Is a
non-developmental approach more efficient than a developmental approach?
Research in Developmental Disabilities, 105, p. 103747.
PARTANEN, M. AND SIEGEL, L.S., 2014. Long-term outcome of the early identification
and intervention of reading disabilities. Reading and Writing, 27(4), pp.665-684.
*PELTIER, C., MORIN, K.L., BOUCK, E.C., LINGO, M.E., PULOS, J.M., SCHEFFLER,
F.A., SUK, A., MATHEWS, L.A., SINCLAIR, T.E. & DEARDORFF, M.E., 2020. A
meta-analysis of single-case research using mathematics manipulatives with
students at risk or identified with a disability. Journal of Special Education, 54(1),
pp.3-15.
PENG, P. AND FUCHS, D., 2016. A meta-analysis of working memory deficits in children
with learning difficulties: Is there a difference between verbal domain and numerical
domain?. Journal of learning disabilities, 49(1), pp.3-20.
PERFETTI, C.A., 1985. Reading ability. oxford university Press.
PITTAS, E. AND NUNES, T., 2014. The relation between morphological awareness and
reading and spelling in Greek: A longitudinal study. Reading and Writing, 27(8),
pp.1507-1527.
*PONTIKAS, C.-M., TSOUKALAS, E. & SERDARI, A., 2022. A map of assistive
technology educative instruments in neurodevelopmental disorders. Disability and
Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, 17(7), pp.738-746.
PRESSLEY, M. AND GASKINS, I.W., 2006. Metacognitively competent reading
comprehension is constructively responsive reading: How can such reading be
developed in students?. Metacognition and learning, 1(1), pp.99-113.
PURPURA, D.J. AND LONIGAN, C.J., 2015. Early numeracy assessment: The
development of the preschool early numeracy scales. Early education and
development, 26(2), pp.286-313.
80
RE, A.M., PEDRON, M., TRESSOLDI, P.E. AND LUCANGELI, D., 2014. Response to
specific training for students with different levels of mathematical
difficulties. Exceptional Children, 80(3), pp.337-352.
*ROBINSON, K.E., KAIZAR, E., CATROPPA, C., GODFREY, C. & YEATES, K.O., 2014.
Systematic review and meta-analysis of cognitive interventions for children with
central nervous system disorders and neurodevelopmental disorders. Journal of
Pediatric Psychology, 39(8), pp.846-865.
*RODGERS, D.B. & LOVEALL, S.J., 2023. Writing interventions for students with
intellectual and developmental disabilities: A meta-analysis. Remedial and Special
Education, 44(3), pp.239-252.
*ROITSCH, J., GUMPERT, M., SPRINGLE, A. & RAYMER, A.M., 2021. Writing
instruction for students with learning disabilities: Quality appraisal of systematic
reviews and meta-analyses. Reading & Writing Quarterly, 37(1), pp.32-44.
*ROJO, M., KING, S., GERSIB, J. & BRYANT, D.P., 2023. Rational number interventions
for students with mathematics difficulties: A meta-analysis. Remedial and Special
Education, 44(3), pp.225-238.
ROSE, J., 2009. Identifying and teaching children and young people with dyslexia and
literacy difficulties. Nottingham: Department for Children, Schools and Families.
ROSS, H., 2020. 'Review 2: The support systems for individuals with SpLDs' in Council
for Science and Technology, Current Understanding, Support Systems, and
Technology-led Interventions for Specific Learning Difficulties Evidence reviews
commissioned for work by the Council for Science and Technology London: The
Council for Science and Technology Available from:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach
ment _data/file/926052/specific-learning-difficulties-spld-cst-report.pdf [Accessed 13
February 2025]
RYDER, J.F., TUNMER, W.E. AND GREANEY, K.T., 2008. Explicit instruction in
phonemic awareness and phonemically based decoding skills as an intervention
strategy for struggling readers in whole language classrooms. Reading and
Writing, 21(4), pp.349-369.
*SADDLER, B., ELLIS-ROBINSON, T. & ASARO-SADDLER, K., 2018. Using sentence
combining instruction to enhance the writing skills of children with learning
disabilities. Learning Disabilities: A Contemporary Journal, 16(2), pp.191-202.
SAVE THE CHILDREN., 2019. International Development and Early Learning
Assessment (IDELA) - Emergent Numeracy. London: Save the Children.
81
*SCAMMACCA, N.K., ROBERTS, G., VAUGHN, S. & STUEBING, K.K., 2015. A meta-
analysis of interventions for struggling readers in grades 4-12: 1980-2011. Journal
of Learning Disabilities, 48(4), pp.369-390.
SCARBOROUGH, H.S., NEUMAN, S. AND DICKINSON, D., 2009. Connecting early
language and literacy to later reading (dis) abilities: Evidence, theory, and
practice. Approaching difficulties in literacy development: Assessment, pedagogy
and programmes, 10, pp.23-38.
SCHWENK, C., SASANGUIE, D., KUHN, J.T., KEMPE, S., DOEBLER, P. AND
HOLLING, H., 2017. (Non-) symbolic magnitude processing in children with
mathematical difficulties: A meta-analysis. Research in developmental
disabilities, 64, pp.152-167.
SHALEV, R.S. AND VON ASTER, M., 2008. Identification, classification, and prevalence
of developmental dyscalculia. Encyclopedia of language and literacy development,
pp.published-online.
SHEA, B.J., REEVES, B.C., WELLS, G., THUKU, M., HAMEL, C., MORAN, J., MOHER,
D., TUGWELL, P., WELCH, V., KRISTJANSSON, E. AND HENRY, D.A., 2017.
AMSTAR 2: a critical appraisal tool for systematic reviews that include randomised
or non-randomised studies of healthcare interventions, or both. bmj, 358.
SNELLING, M., DAWES, A., BIERSTEKER, L., GIRDWOOD, E. AND TREDOUX, C.,
2019. The development of a South African Early Learning Outcomes Measure: A
South African instrument for measuring early learning program outcomes. Child:
Care, Health and Development, 45(2), pp.257-270.
SNOWLING, M., BISHOP, D.V.M. AND STOTHARD, S.E., 2000. Is preschool language
impairment a risk factor for dyslexia in adolescence?. The Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 41(5), pp.587-600.
SNOWLING, M.J., GALLAGHER, A. AND FRITH, U., 2003. Family risk of dyslexia is
continuous: Individual differences in the precursors of reading skill. Child
development, 74(2), pp.358-373.
SNOWLING, M.J. AND MELBY-LERVAG, M., 2016. Oral language deficits in familial
dyslexia: A meta-analysis and review. Psychological bulletin, 142(5), p.498.
*SNYDER, S.M. AND AYRES, K., 2020. Investigating the usage of reading curriculum-
based measurement (CBM-R) to formatively assess the basic reading skills of
students with intellectual disability. Education and Training in Autism and
Developmental Disabilities, 55(1), pp.60-74.
82
*SOHN, H., ACOSTA, K., BROWNELL, M.T., GAGE, N.A., TOMPSON, E. & PUDVAH,
C., 2023. A meta-analysis of interventions to improve reading comprehension
outcomes for adolescents with reading difficulties. Learning Disabilities Research &
Practice, 38(2), pp.85-103.
*SPOONER, F., ROOT, J.R., SAUNDERS, A.F. & BROWDER, D.M., 2019. An updated
evidence-based practice review on teaching mathematics to students with moderate
and severe developmental disabilities. Remedial and Special Education, 40(3),
pp. 150-165.
STANOVICH, K.E. AND SIEGEL, L.S., 1994. Phenotypic performance profile of children
with reading disabilities: A regression-based test of the phonological-core variable-
difference model. Journal of educational psychology, 86(1), p.24.
*STEVENS, E.A., RODGERS, M.A. & POWELL, S.R., 2018. Mathematics interventions
for upper elementary and secondary students: A meta-analysis of research.
Remedial and Special Education, 39(6), pp.327-340.
*STEVENS, E.A., AUSTIN, C., MOORE, C., SCAMMACCA, N., BOUCHER, A.N. &
VAUGHN, S., 2021. Current state of the evidence: Examining the effects of Orton-
Gillingham reading interventions for students with or at risk for word-level reading
disabilities. Exceptional Children, 87(4), pp.397-417.
SUMNER, E., CONNELLY, V. AND BARNETT, A.L., 2013. Children with dyslexia are
slow writers because they pause more often and not because they are slow at
handwriting execution. Reading and writing, 26(6), pp.991-1008.
SUMNER, E., CONNELLY, V. AND BARNETT, A.L., 2014. The influence of spelling
ability on handwriting production: children with and without dyslexia. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 40(5), p.1441.
SUMNER, E., CONNELLY, V. AND BARNETT, A.L., 2016. The influence of spelling
ability on vocabulary choices when writing for children with dyslexia. Journal of
learning disabilities, 49(3), pp.293-304.
SUMNER, E. AND CONNELLY, V., 2020. Writing and revision strategies of students with
and without dyslexia. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 53(3), pp.189-198.
SWELLER, J., 2011. Cognitive load theory. In Psychology of learning and
motivation (Vol. 55, pp. 37-76). Academic Press.
TANAKA, H., BLACK, J.M., HULME, C., STANLEY, L.M., KESLER, S.R., WHITFIELD-
GABRIELI, S., REISS, A.L., GABRIELI, J.D. AND HOEFT, F., 2011. The brain basis
83
of the phonological deficit in dyslexia is independent of IQ. Psychological
science, 22(11), pp.1442-1451.
TILSTRA, J., MCMASTER, K., VAN DEN BROEK, P., KENDEOU, P. AND RAPP, D.,
2009. Simple but complex: Components of the simple view of reading across grade
levels. Journal of research in reading, 32(4), pp.383-401.
TORGESEN, J.K., ALEXANDER, A.W., WAGNER, R.K., RASHOTTE, C.A., VOELLER,
K.K. AND CONWAY, T., 2001. Intensive remedial instruction for children with
severe reading disabilities: Immediate and long-term outcomes from two
instructional approaches. Journal of learning disabilities, 34(1), pp.33-58.
VAN BERGEN, E., VAN DER LEIJ, A. AND DE JONG, P.F., 2014. The intergenerational
multiple deficit model and the case of dyslexia. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 8,
p.346.
VAN HERWEGEN, J., THOMAS, M., GORDON, R., MARSHALL, C., DOCKRELL, J.
AND MASTERMAN, T., 2023. MetaSENSe: Raising educational outcomes for
pupils with special educational needs and disabilities.
VESSONEN, T., WIDLUND, A., HAKKARAINEN, A. AND AUNIO, P., 2023. Validating
the early numeracy teacher rating scale for preschoolers (TRS-EN). European
Early Childhood Education Research Journal, 31(2), pp.205-224.
*VICO-QUESADA, R., MARTÍN-MARTÍN, J. AND GONZÁLEZ-SÁNCHEZ, M., 2023.
Functional Assessment of Handwriting Among Children: A Systematic Review of the
Psychometric Properties.
*WANZEK, J., STEVENS, E.A., WILLIAMS, K.J., SCAMMACCA, N., VAUGHN, S. &
SARGENT, K., 2018. Current evidence on the effects of intensive early reading
interventions. Grantee Submission.
WEILAND, C., WOLFE, C.B., HURWITZ, M.D., CLEMENTS, D.H. & SARAMA, J., 2012.
The effectiveness of a short form of the Research-Based Early Mathematics
Assessment (REMA-SF). Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 27(3), pp.541-554.
WILLBURGER, E., FUSSENEGGER, B., MOLL, K., WOOD, G. AND LANDERL, K.,
2008. Naming speed in dyslexia and dyscalculia. Learning and individual
differences, 18(2), pp.224-236.
WILLCUTT, E.G., MCGRATH, L.M., PENNINGTON, B.F., KEENAN, J.M., DEFRIES,
J.C., OLSON, R.K. AND WADSWORTH, S.J., 2019. Understanding comorbidity
between specific learning disabilities. New directions for child and adolescent
development, 2019(165), pp.91-109.
84
WOLTER, J.A. AND DILWORTH, V., 2014. The effects of a multilinguistic morphological
awareness approach for improving language and literacy. Journal of Learning
Disabilities, 47(1), pp.76-85.
WOODCOCK, R. AND BATTERY, J.M.W.J.P., 1989. Revised. DLM Teaching
Resources.
ZHENG, X., SWANSON, H.L. AND MARCOULIDES, G.A., 2011. Working memory
components as predictors of children's mathematical word problem solving. Journal
of experimental child psychology, 110(4), pp.481-498.
*ZOLKIPLI, N.Z., RAHMATULLAH, B., MOHAMAD SAMURI, S., ÁRVA, V. & SUGIYO
PRANOTO, Y.K., 2023. 'Leave no one behind': A systematic literature review on
game-based learning courseware for preschool children with learning disabilities.
Southeast Asia Early Childhood, 12(1), pp.79-97.
85
Department
for Education
© Department for Education Copyright 2025
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0,
except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit
nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3.
Where we have identified any third-party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
Reference: RR1547
ISBN: 978-1-83870-698-2
For any enquiries regarding this publication, contact www.gov.uk/contact-dfe.
This document is available for download at www.gov.uk/government/publications.
86
