Department
for Education
Mental health and
behaviour in
schools
November 2018
Contents
Summary
3
About this departmental advice
3
Expiry or review date
3
Who is this publication for?
4
Acknowledgements
4
Key points and principles
4
Chapter 1 - Schools' responsibilities in relation to mental health
6
Chapter 2 - Creating a whole school culture
8
Embedding the culture
9
Chapter 3 - Understanding the link between mental health and behaviour
11
Mental health problems in children and young people
11
Prevalence of mental health problems in children and young people
12
Risk and protective factors
13
Identifying children with possible mental health problems
16
Identification and measurement tools
16
Exclusions
17
Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) and other events that may have an
impact on pupils
18
Children in Need, looked-after and previously looked-after children
19
Mental health and special educational needs
19
Chapter 4 - Providing support and collaborative working with other agencies
21
Additional in-school support for children with the most complex problems
21
Defining local services
22
Commissioning services directly
23
Working collaboratively with other schools
23
Referring serious cases to CYPMHS
24
Working with parents/carers
24
Working with Alternative Provision (AP)
25
Chapter 5 - Where to find out more
27
Transforming Children and Young People's Mental Health provision: Green
Paper
27
Further information
27
2
Summary
About this departmental advice
This is non-statutory, departmental advice from the Department for Education (DfE).
Mental health problems affect many people, and most schools will have pupils who
need mental health support. This advice aims to help schools to support pupils
whose mental health problems manifest themselves in behaviour. Schools have an
important role to play in supporting the mental health and wellbeing of children by
developing whole school approaches tailored to their particular needs, as well as
considering the needs of individual pupils. This advice:
Sets out schools' roles and responsibilities in relation to mental health and
behaviour, within their existing duties;
Outlines how schools can identify whether a child or young person's
behaviour -disruptive, withdrawn, anxious, depressed or otherwise - may be
related to a mental health problem, and how to support them in these
circumstances;
Provides advice and guidance on working with other professionals and
external agencies where appropriate; and
Provides links to additional support available to schools, including
frameworks, audit tools, evidence and resources.
This advice sits alongside our non-statutory Behaviour and Discipline in Schools
advice¹, which summarises the statutory powers and duties for school staff and
approaches they can adopt to manage behaviour in their schools. It supports
implementation of chapter 6 of the Special Educational Needs and Disabilities
(SEND) Code of Practice, which sets out an expected process for identifying and
responding to additional needs. It also reflects recent policy developments in other
related policy areas, in particular alternative provision, exclusions, and safeguarding.
We have updated this advice as part of our wider work to support schools and
colleges to promote good mental wellbeing in children.
Expiry or review date
This advice will be kept under review and updated as necessary.
1
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/behaviour-and-discipline-in-schools
3
Who is this publication for?
This advice is for all school staff² working to support children. This includes school
leadership, governing bodies, primary and secondary school teachers, pastoral
leaders, Special Educational Needs Coordinators, mental health leads, designated
safeguarding leads and designated teachers for looked after children.
This advice has been written for schools and relates, among other things, to school
duties on behaviour, and school curriculum design. But the interventions and support
included in this guidance may also be helpful for colleges and other post-16
institutions.
Acknowledgements
In developing this advice, the Department has worked with:
Tom Bennett, Independent Behaviour Adviser
National Children's Bureau (NCB)
Social Emotional and Behavioural Difficulties Association (SEBDA)
Attachment Research Community
Educational Psychologists
A number of effective schools
NHS England
Public Health England
Ofsted
Key points and principles
Schools have a central role to play in enabling their pupils to be resilient and
to support good mental health and wellbeing. It is important that schools
promote good mental wellbeing for all pupils. Education about relationships,
sex and health can be important vehicles through which schools can teach
pupils about mental health and wellbeing.
A school's approach to mental health and behaviour should be part of a
consistent whole school approach to mental health and wellbeing. This should
involve providing a structured school environment with clear expectations of
2 In all types of schools including maintained schools, pupil referral units, maintained nursery schools,
academies, free schools, and independent schools. It is also intended to be helpful to staff in
alternative provision settings, although some of the legislation mentioned in this advice will only apply
to those alternative provision settings that are legally classified as schools.
4
behaviour, well communicated social norms and routines, which are
reinforced with highly consistent consequence systems. This should be paired
with an individualised graduated response when the behavioural issues might
be a result of educational, mental health, other needs or vulnerabilities.
Schools should consider how best to use their SEN and pupil premium
resources to provide support for children with mental health difficulties where
appropriate.
School staff cannot act as mental health experts and should not try to
diagnose conditions. However, they should ensure they have clear systems
and processes in place for identifying possible mental health problems,
including routes to escalate and clear referral and accountability systems.
There are things that schools can do for all pupils, as well as those at risk of
developing mental health problems, to intervene early to create a safe and
calm educational environment and strengthen resilience before serious
mental health problems occur.
As set out in Chapter 6 of the statutory SEND 0-25 years Code of Practice
2015, schools need to be alert to how mental health problems can underpin
behaviour issues in order to support pupils effectively, working with external
support where needed. They also need to be aware of their duties under the
Equality Act 2010, recognising that some mental health issues will meet the
definition of disability.
When schools suspect a pupil has a mental health problem, they should use
the graduated response process (assess - plan - do - review) to put support
in place. There are a number of identification and measurement tools, such as
the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) and Boxall Profile, which
can support this process.
Schools should ensure they have clear systems and processes in place for
early intervention and identification, referral to experienced skilled
professionals, and clear accountability systems.
It is important that schools have an understanding of the local services
available, including school nurses, and how and when to draw on or
commission them. Where required, schools should expect parents and pupils
to seek and receive support elsewhere, including from their GP, NHS
services, trained professionals working in specialist CYPMHS, voluntary
organisations and other sources. Further guidance on how schools can work
with other agencies can be found in Chapter 4.
There are national organisations that can offer further resources, training,
support and advice. Help and information about evidence-based approaches
is available from a range of sources. More information can be found in
Chapter 5.
5
Chapter 1 - Schools' responsibilities in relation to
mental health
1.1
Schools have an important role to play in supporting the mental health and
wellbeing of their pupils, by developing approaches tailored to the particular needs of
their pupils. All schools are under a statutory duty to promote the welfare of their
pupils, which includes: preventing impairment of children's health or development,
and taking action to enable all children to have the best outcomes. Full details are
set out in Keeping Children Safe in Education (KCSIE) statutory guidance³.
1.2
Early intervention to identify issues and provide effective support is crucial.
The school role in supporting and promoting mental health and wellbeing can be
summarised as:
Prevention: creating a safe and calm environment where mental health
problems are less likely, improving the mental health and wellbeing of the
whole school population, and equipping pupils to be resilient so that they can
manage the normal stress of life effectively. This will include teaching pupils
about mental wellbeing through the curriculum and reinforcing this teaching
through school actitives and ethos;
Identification: recognising emerging issues as early and accurately as
possible;
Early support: helping pupils to access evidence based early support and
interventions; and
Access to specialist support: working effectively with external agencies to
provide swift access or referrals to specialist support and treatment.
1.3
There is no requirement on schools to have a standalone mental health
policy, although some do choose to⁴. However, schools are required to produce (and
in some cases publish online⁵⁶) a range of policies which can be used to promote
and support mental health and wellbeing, either as a statutory requirement7 or good
practice as recommended by DfE. These policies need to be consistent with schools'
duties under the Equality Act 2010. For example, where a pupil has a mental health
condition that amounts to a disability and this adversely affects their behaviour, the
school must make reasonable adjustments to its policies, the physical environment,
3
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/keeping-children-safe-in-education-2
4
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-mental-health-in-schools-and-colleges
5
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/what-maintained-schools-must-publish-online
6
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/what-academies-free-schools-and-colleges-should-publish-online
7
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/35
7068/statutory_schools_policies_Sept_14_FINAL.pdf
6
the support it offers, and how it responds in particular situations. Published
behaviour policies need to be consistent with the legal requirement that treating all
pupils the same may be unlawful where a disability affects behaviour. It may be
unlawful to apply a behaviour policy that treats all pupils the same if a pupil's
disability makes it harder for them to comply with the policy than other pupils who are
not disabled. More detailed advice on reasonable adjustments can be found in our
behaviour and discipline in schools advice.
1.4
Schools are under a duty to use their 'best endeavours' to identify and support
pupils with SEN meet their pupils' special educational needs As part of this duty, it
is important that schools consider how best to use some of their SEN resources to
provide support for pupils with mental health difficulties that amount to special
educational needs. It is also important that all the needs of those pupils who attract
pupil premium to the school, including mental health needs, are assessed and
support is arranged accordingly.
1.5
Schools should also have in place arrangements which reflect the importance
of safeguarding and promoting the welfare of their pupils. Mental health problems
can, in some cases, be an indicator that a child has suffered or is at risk of suffering
abuse, neglect or exploitation. It is essential that staff are aware of their
responsibilities, as set out in statutory guidance (Part 1 of KCSIE and in Working
Together to Safeguard Children). If staff have a mental health concern that is also a
safeguarding concern, immediate action should be taken, following their school's
child protection policy and speaking to the designated safeguarding lead or a deputy.
School and college staff are particularly important as they are in a position to identify
concerns early, provide help for children, and prevent concerns from escalating.
7
Chapter 2 — Creating a whole school culture
2.1
The culture, ethos and environment of the school can have a profound
influence on both pupil and staff mental wellbeing. Environments that are hostile,
aggressive, chaotic or unpredictable can be harmful to mental health, and can lead
to stressful teaching and working conditions. Schools are in a unique position, as
they are able to help prevent mental health problems by promoting resilience as part
of an integrated, whole school approach that is tailored to the needs of their pupils. A
whole school approach is one that goes beyond the teaching in the classroom to
pervade all aspects of school life, including:
culture, ethos and environment: the health and wellbeing of pupils and staff is
promoted through the 'hidden' or 'informal' curriculum, including leadership
practice, the school's policies, values and attitudes, together with the social
and physical environment;
teaching: using the curriculum to develop pupils' knowledge about health and
wellbeing; and
partnerships with families and the community: proactive engagement with
families, outside agencies, and the wider community to promote consistent
support for children's health and wellbeing⁸.
2.2
An important element of school leadership at any level is to create a culture
where calm, dignity and structure encompass every space and activity. This
approach is one of the most effective ways of encouraging good mental health, in
order to avoid circumstances where poor mental health is exacerbated. This model,
in conjunction with an efficient system to identify common symptoms of mental
health, followed by precise and targeted care by appropriate health care
professionals, should be the aspiration for every school. Further advice on how to
identify and support pupils with particular needs can be found in Chapter 3.
2.3
To create the culture, the leadership team should set out their vision for the
school. This means setting clear behaviour expectations, that embody high
expectations from all, conveyed consistently throughout the whole school
community. The vision should be underpinned by a clear system of rewards and
sanctions and an accountability system that sets expectations for all staff, parents
and pupils to play their part as much as they are able; and should be aimed at all
times to the mutual benefit of every member of the school community.
8
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/promoting-children-and-young-peoples-emotional.
health-and-wellbeing
8
Embedding the culture
2.4
As the first step in embedding the culture, the leadership team should ensure
high levels of pupil commitment to the school vision and policies. They should
communicate their vision clearly with the whole school community (which includes
staff, parents/carers, pupils and partnerships with outside agencies), to ensure it is
highly visible, embedded throughout the school and that it underpins everything the
school does. This can be achieved through high levels of pupil and parent
engagement in designing the vision, such as working with children to ensure the
language is child-friendly and accessible to all.
2.5
The school should also emphasise the importance of promoting positive
mental wellbeing. Schools can use various strategies to support pupils who are
experiencing high levels of psychological stress, or who are at risk of developing
mental health problems. This can include teaching through curriculum subjects such
as relationships education, relationship and sex education, health education or
PSHE; counselling; positive classroom management; developing social skills;
working with parents/carers; or peer support. Further information on the types of
interventions available can be found in Chapter 5.
2.6
In addition, schools should develop a whole school behaviour policy, which
includes measures to prevent and tackle bullying¹⁰, along with setting out a clear
system of rewards and sanctions. This should be paired with an individualised,
graduated response¹¹ when the behaviour might be a result of educational, mental
health, other needs or vulnerabilities.
2.7
The leadership team is responsible for determining the training needs of their
staff within their approach to school improvement, professional development and
performance management. The Teachers' Standards set out the expectation that all
teachers manage behaviour effectively to ensure a good and safe educational
environment, and requires teachers to have a clear understanding of the needs of all
pupils, including those with mental health needs.
2.8
The leadership team should promote continuous professional development to
ensure that staff are aware of some common symptoms of mental health problems:
what is and isn't a cause for concern; and what to do if they think they have spotted
a developing problem. Clear systems and processes should be in place to help staff
who identify possible mental health problems, providing routes to escalate issues
with clear referral and accountability systems. Schools should work closely with other
9
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/counselling-in-schools
10 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/approaches-to-preventing-and-tackling-bulying
11
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-code-of-practice-0-to-25
9
professionals to have a range of support services that can be put in place depending
on the identified needs (both within and beyond the school).
2.9
The leadership team should also ensure there are clear policies and
processes in place to ensure that stigma is reduced and pupils feel comfortable
talking about mental health concerns. Pupils should know where to go for further
information or support should they want to talk about their own, their peers', or their
families mental health or wellbeing.
2.10 It is important that where vulnerable pupils or groups are identified within the
school, provision should be made to support and promote their positive mental
health. Abuse, neglect, exploitation and a range of adverse parental, familial and
contextual circumstances are identified risk factors for mental health problems, often
experienced by children identified as Children in Need and supported by children's
social care. Looked-after and adopted children may also have faced such risk
factors. Socio-economic disadvantage is another identified risk factor for mental
health, so this may include children currently or previously receiving Free School
Meals and eligible for the Pupil Premium.
10
Chapter 3 — Understanding the link between mental
health and behaviour
Mental health is defined as a state of wellbeing in which every individual
recognises his or her own potential, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can
work productively and fruitfully, and is able to make a contribution to his or her own
community. World Health Organisation, August 2014
Mental health problems in children
3.1
Short term stress and worry is a normal part of life and many issues can be
experienced as mild or transitory challenges for some children and their families.
Others will experience more serious and longer lasting effects. The same experience
can have different effects on different children depending on other factors in their life.
For example, it is normal for children to feel nervous or under stress around exam
times, but other factors can make such stress part of an enduring and persistent
mental health problem for some children. When a problem is particularly severe or
persistent over time, or when a number of these difficulties are experienced at the
same time, children are often described as experiencing mental health problems.
3.2
Where children experience a range of emotional and behavioural problems
that are outside the normal range for their age, they might be described as
experiencing mental health problems or disordersi 12 Mental health professionals
have classified these as:
emotional disorders, for example phobias, anxiety states and depression;
conduct disorders, for example stealing, defiance, fire-setting, aggression and
anti-social behaviour;
hyperkinetic disorders, for example disturbance of activity and attention;
developmental disorders, for example delay in acquiring certain skills such as
speech, social ability or bladder control, primarily affecting children with
autism and those with pervasive developmental disorders;
attachment disorders, for example children who are markedly distressed or
socially impaired as a result of an extremely abnormal pattern of attachment
to parents or major care givers;
Trauma disorders, such as post-traumatic stress disorder, as a result of
traumatic experiences or persistent periods of abuse and neglect; and
2-https://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Pages/bodymap.aspx?Subject=Mental%20health20disorders
11
other mental health problems including eating disorders, habit disorders,
somatic disorders; and psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia and manic
depressive disorder.
3.3
Only appropriately trained professionals should attempt to make a diagnosis
of a mental health problem. Non-professional diagnoses, however well meant, can
exacerbate or promote mental health problems. Schools, however, are well placed to
observe children day-to-day and identify those whose behaviour suggests that they
may be experiencing a mental health problem or be at risk of developing one. This
may include withdrawn pupils whose needs may otherwise go unrecognised.
Prevalence of mental health problems in children
3.4
Mental health problems affect many people, and most schools will have pupils
who need some mental health support¹³
3.5
We know that where a pupil has certain types of Special Educational Need
(SEN) there is an increased likelihood of mental health problems. Children with
autism or learning difficulties, for example, are significantly more likely to have
conditions such as anxiety
3.6
Children in Need, looked-after children and previously looked-after children
are more likely to have SEN and to experience the challenge of social, emotional
and mental health issues 15 than their peers. 16 For example, they may struggle with
executive functioning skills¹ forming trusting relationships, social skills, managing
strong feelings (e.g. shame, sadness, anxiety and anger), sensory processing
difficulties, foetal alcohol syndrome and coping with transitions and change. Children
in Need may be living in very chaotic circumstances and be suffering or at risk of
suffering abuse, neglect and exploitation. They may also have less support outside
13 On 22 November 2018, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) will publish new data on the
prevalence of mental health conditions in children and young people.
14
https://sp.ukdataservice.ac.uk/doc/5269/mrdoc/pdf/5269technicalreport.pdf
15 Social, emotional and mental health is one of the four broad areas of children's SEN identified in
Special Educational Needs and Disability Code of Practice 0 - 25 years (see Paragraph 5.32)
16 In 2015/16, 49% of Children in Need and 55% of looked-after children had a special educational
needs compared with 14% of other children, with social emotional and mental health needs the most
prevalent primary type of SEN. Based on Strength and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) scores, in
2017 only 49% of looked after children had emotional and behavioural health that is considered
normal. (Looked After Children Statistical First Release Additional Tables)
17 The mental processes enabling us to plan, focus attention, remember instructions, and juggle
multiple tasks successfully. (Harvard University Centre on the Developing Child)
12
of school. The impact of these circumstances can have wide-ranging impacts on
children's own behaviour, their interpersonal behaviour and emotional state. 18
Risk and protective factors
Factors that put children at risk
3.7
Certain individuals and groups are more at risk of developing mental health
problems than others. These risks can relate to the child themselves, to their family,
or to their community or life events. These risk factors are listed in table 1.
3.8
Risk factors are cumulative. For example, children exposed to multiple risks
such as social disadvantage, family adversity and cognitive or attention problems are
much more likely to develop behavioural problems¹⁹ Longitudinal analysis of data
for 16,000 children suggested that boys with five or more risk factors were almost
eleven times more likely to develop conduct disorder under the age of ten than boys
with no risk factors. Girls of a similar age with five or more risk factors were nineteen
times more likely to develop the disorder than those with no risk factors²⁰.
Factors that make children more resilient
3.9
Research suggests that there is a complex interplay between the risk factors
in children's lives, and the protective factors which can promote their resilience. As
social disadvantage and the number of stressful life events accumulate for children,
more protective factors are needed to act as a counterbalance. The key protective
factors which build resilience to mental health problems are shown alongside the risk
factors in table 1, below.
3.10 In order to promote positive mental health, it is important that schools have an
understanding of the protective factors that can enable pupils to be resilient when
they encounter problems and challenges. The role that schools play in promoting the
resilience of their pupils is particularly important for children with less supportive
home lives, who may not have a trusted adult they can talk to. Schools should be a
safe and affirming place for children where they can develop a sense of belonging
and feel able to trust and talk openly with adults about their problems.
18 Behavioural and emotional alerting features for abuse and neglect are set out in the NICE guideline
on abuse and neglect
19 Brown, E., Khan, L. and Parsonage, M. (2012) A Chance to Change: Delivering effective parenting
programmes to transform lives. Centre for Mental Health
20 Murray, J. J. (2010). Very early predictors of conduct problems and crime: results from a national
cohort study. Journal Of Child Psychology & Psychiatry, 51(11), pp 1198-1207
13
Table 1: Risk and protective factors that are believed to be associated with
mental health outcomes
Risk factors
Protective factors
In the child
Genetic influences
Secure attachment experience
Low IQ and learning
Outgoing temperament as an
disabilities
infant
Specific development delay
Good communication skills,
or neuro-diversity
sociability
Communication difficulties
Being a planner and having a
Difficult temperament
belief in control
Physical illness
Humour
Academic failure
A positive attitude
Low self-esteem
Experiences of success and
achievement
Faith or spirituality
Capacity to reflect
In the family
Overt parental conflict
At least one good parent-child
including domestic violence
relationship (or one supportive
Family breakdown (including
adult)
where children are taken
Affection
into care or adopted)
Clear, consistent discipline
Inconsistent or unclear
Support for education
discipline
Supportive long term relationship
Hostile and rejecting
or the absence of severe discord
relationships
Failure to adapt to a child's
changing needs
Physical, sexual, emotional
abuse, or neglect
Parental psychiatric illness
Parental criminality,
alcoholism or personality
disorder
Death and loss - including
loss of friendship
14
Risk factors
Protective factors
In the school
Bullying including online
Clear policies on behaviour and
(cyber)
bullying
Discrimination
Staff behaviour policy (also
Breakdown in or lack of
known as code of conduct)
positive friendships
'Open door' policy for children to
Deviant peer influences
raise problems
Peer pressure
A whole-school approach to
Peer on peer abuse
promoting good mental health
Poor pupil to teacher/school
Good pupil to teacher/school staff
staff relationships
relationships
Positive classroom management
A sense of belonging
Positive peer influences
Positive friendships
Effective safeguarding and Child
Protection policies.
An effective early help process
Understand their role in and be
part of effective multi-agency
working
Appropriate procedures to ensure
staff are confident to can raise
concerns about policies and
processes, and know they will be
dealt with fairly and effectively
In the
Socio-economic
Wider supportive network
community
disadvantage
Good housing
Homelessness
High standard of living
Disaster, accidents, war or
High morale school with positive
other overwhelming events
policies for behaviour, attitudes
Discrimination
and anti-bullying
Exploitation, including by
Opportunities for valued social
criminal gangs and
roles
organised crime groups,
Range of sport/leisure activities
trafficking, online abuse,
sexual exploitation and the
influences of extremism
leading to radicalisation
Other significant life events
15
Identifying children with possible mental health problems
3.11 Negative experiences and distressing life events can affect mental health in a
way that can bring about changes in a young person's behaviour or emotional state,
displayed in a range of different ways, all of which can be an indication of an
underlying problem²¹. This can include:
Emotional state (fearful, withdrawn, low self-esteem)
Behaviour (aggressive or oppositional; habitual body rocking)
Interpersonal behaviours (indiscriminate contact or affection seeking, over-
friendliness or excessive clinginess; demonstrating excessively 'good'
behaviour to prevent disapproval; failing to seek or accept appropriate comfort
or affection from an appropriate person when significantly distressed; coercive
controlling behaviour; or lack of ability to understand and recognise emotions).
3.12 Where there are concerns about behaviour, the school should instigate an
assessment (as set out in paragraph 3.14) to determine whether there are any
underlying factors such as undiagnosed learning difficulties, difficulties with speech
and language, child protection concerns, or mental health problems.
Identification and measurement tools
3.13 There are two key elements that can enable schools to reliably identify
children at risk of mental health problems.
effective use of data so that changes in pupils' patterns of attainment,
attendance or behaviour are noticed and can be acted upon; along with
an effective pastoral system so that at least one member of staff (e.g. a
form tutor or class teacher) knows every pupil well and has received training
to spot where bad or unusual behaviour may have a root cause that needs
addressing. Where this is the case, the mental health lead, pastoral system
(including school nurses) or school policies should provide the structure
through which staff can escalate the issue and take decisions about what to
do next. This system should also provide the opportunity for pupils to seek
support in a confidential way.
21
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng76/chapter/Recommendations/recognising-child-abuse-and-
neglect
https://pathways.nice.org.uk/pathways/social-and-emotional-welbeing-for-children-and-young-people
16
3.14 When schools suspect that a pupil is having mental health difficulties, they
should not delay putting support in place, using the graduated response process :
an assessment to establish a clear analysis of the pupil's needs;
a plan to set out how the pupil will be supported;
action to provide that support; and
regular reviews to assess the effectiveness of the provision and lead to
changes where necessary.
This can happen whilst the school is gathering the evidence, and the pupil's
response to that support can help further identify their needs. Tools such as the
Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ)²² and the Boxall Profile 23 can support
schools through this process. In addition to informing decisions on whether to seek
specialist support, they can also provide a basis for ascertaining whether the initial
intervention is working or whether something different needs to be tried. Further
information on identification and measurement tools can be found in Chapter 4.
Exclusions
3.15 When considering excluding a pupil, schools should consider any contributing
factors that are identified after an incident of poor behaviour has occurred, which
could include where the pupil has mental health problems. Further guidance on how
to identify when pupils may have possible mental health problems can be found in
paragraph 3.13.
3.16 Where appropriate, schools should consider if action can be taken to address
underlying causes of disruptive behaviour before issuing an exclusion. In doing so, if
a child has SEN or a disability and/or is a Looked After Child, there are additional
requirements and expectations of them as set out in the relevant legislation and
statutory guidance. Permanent exclusion, for example, needs to be very much a last
resort. However, in all cases, schools must balance the interests of the pupil against
of the mental and physical health of the whole school community. 24
22 The English (UK) version of the SDQ is available here:
http://www.sdginfo.com/py/sdginfo/b3.py?language=Englishgz(UK)
23 https://boxallprofile.org/
24 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/school-exclusion
17
Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) and other events
that may have an impact on pupils
3.17 The balance between the risk and protective factors set out above is most
likely to be disrupted when difficult events happen in pupils' lives. These include:
loss or separation - resulting from death, parental separation, divorce,
hospitalisation, loss of friendships (especially in adolescence), family conflict
or breakdown that results in the child having to live elsewhere, being taken
into care or adopted, deployment of parents in armed forces families;
life changes - such as the birth of a sibling, moving house or changing
schools or during transition from primary to secondary school, or secondary
school to sixth form;
traumatic experiences such as abuse, neglect, domestic violence, bullying,
violence, accidents or injuries; and
other traumatic incidents such as a natural disaster or terrorist attack. Some
groups could be susceptible to such incidents, even if not directly affected.
For example, schools should ensure they are aware of armed forces families,
who may have parents who are deployed in areas of terrorist activity and are
surrounded by the issues in the media.
3.18 It is important that schools provide support to pupils at such times, including
those who are not presenting any obvious issues. Providing early help is more
effective in promoting the welfare of children than reacting later, and can also
prevent further problems (including mental health problems) arising. Further
guidance on early help can be found in 'Working together to Safeguard Children'
statutory guidance²
3.19 This support may come from existing provision within the school, or it may
require the involvement of specialist staff or support services, such as the school
nursing service. Further information about how to support individual children through
difficult events, and on whole school trauma and attachment awareness informed
approaches, can be found in Chapter 5.
25
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/working-together-to-safeguard-children-2
18
Children in Need, looked-after and previously looked-after
children
3.20 Where children have suffered abuse and neglect, or other potentially
traumatic adverse childhood experiences, this can have a lasting impact throughout
childhood, adolescence and into adulthood. These children may be receiving
statutory social care support and recognised as Children in Need, or currently or
previously in local authority care as looked-after children.
3.21 It is key that school staff are aware of how these children's experiences, and
their high prevalence of special educational needs and mental health needs, can
impact on their behaviour and education. They should be able to reflect this in the
design and application of behaviour policies, including through individualised
graduated responses, balanced with the needs of the whole school community and
its physical and mental health.
3.22 Where a child is being supported through local authority children's social care,
their allocated social worker can be an important source of appropriately-shared
information about wider developmental needs, child protection concerns, and
parental, familial and contextual circumstances. Effective multi-agency working
between schools and social care will help to inform a school's assessment of child's
educational and mental health needs, as well as enabling a prompt response to any
safeguarding concerns.
3.23 The school's designated teacher and local authority Virtual School Heads
(VSH) are also sources of advice and expertise on looked after and previously
looked after children. Where a school has concerns about a looked-after child's
behaviour, the designated teacher and relevant VSH should be informed at the
earliest opportunity so they can help decide how to support the child to improve their
behaviour. Where a school has concerns about the behaviour of a previously
looked-after child, the child's parents or the school's designated teacher, following
discussions with the child's parents, may seek the advice of the VSH on strategies to
support the child to avoid exclusion.
Mental health and special educational needs
3.24 Early intervention to address underlying causes of disruptive behaviour should
include an assessment of whether appropriate provision is in place to support any
SEN or disability that a pupil may have. The head teacher should also consider the
use of a multi-agency assessment for a pupil who demonstrates persistent disruptive
behaviour. Such assessments may pick up unidentified SEN, disability or mental
health problems but the scope of the assessment could go further, for example, by
seeking to identify housing or family problems.
19
3.25 Not all children with mental health difficulties will have SEN. But persistent or
serious mental health difficulties will often meet the definition of SEN, in that they
lead to pupils having significantly greater difficulty in learning than the majority of
those of the same age. As set out above, the graduated response process set out in
the SEND Code of Practice provides a framework for deciding what support to offer,
which would be good practice regardless of whether or not a pupil has SEN.
3.26 The majority of children with SEN will have their needs met through
mainstream education providers and will not need Education, Health and Care plans
(EHC plans).
3.27 It is important that the qualified teacher who acts as the special educational
needs co-ordinator (SENCO) ensures that all adults working in the school
understand their responsibilities to children with SEND. This includes pupils whose
persistent mental health difficulties mean they need special educational provision.
Specifically, the SENCO will ensure colleagues understand how the school identifies
and meets pupils' needs, provide advice and support to colleagues as needed and
liaise with external SEND professionals as necessary.
20
Chapter 4 — Providing support and collaborative
working with other agencies
4.1
There are a range of options for identifying where pupils might need extra
support, and for helping schools to understand what sort of support might be
suitable, including working with external agencies.
4.2
It is important that children are provided with support as soon as a problem
emerges, at any point in their life. Providing early help is more effective in promoting
the welfare of children than reacting later. Schools should have access to local
educational psychology services, who will support children with SEND, but can also
be well placed to advise on emerging mental health needs and either to provide
direct intervention or signpost to other, more appropriate, forms of support.
4.3
Local areas should have a comprehensive range of effective, evidence-based
services in place to address assessed needs early, and will typically include support
for mental health. Full details regarding early help and the role of schools can be
found in Part 1 of Keeping Children Safe in Education and Chapter 1 of Working
Together to Safeguard Children.
Additional in-school support for children with the most
complex problems
4.4
For children with the most complex problems, additional in-school
interventions may include:
support for the pupil's teacher, to help them manage the pupil's behaviour
within the classroom, taking into account the needs of the whole class;
additional educational one to one support for the pupil to help them cope
better within the classroom;
an individual health care plan. Governing bodies, academy trusts and
management committees must comply with their statutory duty in ensuring
that schools to make arrangements to support pupils with medical conditions.
If mental health professionals have recommended medication this should be
detailed in the individual healthcare plan. School staff should be aware of any
medication that children are taking, and how this should be stored and
administered. The Department has published statutory guidance about the
support pupils with medical conditions should receive at school²⁶;
2 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-pupils-at-school-with-medical-conditions-?
21
one to one therapeutic work with the pupil, delivered by trained mental
health specialists (within or beyond the school), which might take the form of
cognitive behavioural therapy, behaviour modification or counselling
approaches. Where possible, such therapy should be scheduled so as to
minimise the disruption to the pupil's attendance in school; and
family support and/or therapy could also be considered by mental health
professionals to help the child and their family better understand and
manage behaviour.
Defining local services
4.5
Schools may wish to influence their local health and wellbeing boards, who
are responsible for collecting and analysing information about current and future
health and social care needs and develop a strategy for commissioning the right
balance of services. All health services used by children are within the scope of the
health and wellbeing board, including specialist children and young people's mental
health services (CYPMHS).
4.6
Until 2021 all local areas must publish a multi-agency Local Transformation
Plan (LTP), which is refreshed each year and overseen by the Health and Wellbeing
Board. The LTP is the strategic document setting out how services for children's
mental health are being improved. The LTP should be available on the Local
Authority and CCG websites.
4.7
Schools can feed in what they know about the needs of their pupils, such as
information on pupils with specific impairments (such as mental health problems)
and more broadly, share their perspective, experience and knowledge of pupil
needs. They can also agree the role they will play in commissioning and delivering
specialist services. This can help to shape a system that is better able to deliver for
their pupils. To get involved, schools should approach their Director of Children's
Services (DCS) or local Healthwatch organisation, who are responsible for engaging
children and young people, professionals and other stakeholders in the work of the
board. The new Mental Health Support Teams introduced in the Transforming
Children and Young People's Mental Health Provision green paper will build on
these arrangements. Further information can be found in Chapter 5.
4.8
Schools should also be aware of the role they are expected to play in the new
multi-agency safeguarding arrangements, and how they can influence those
arrangements. Full details are in Chapter 3 of Working Together to safeguard
Children.
22
Commissioning services directly
4.9
Many individual schools are able to commission individual support and health
services for pupils, which gives increased flexibility and provides an early
intervention response.
4.10 It is important that schools commission appropriately qualified and
experienced external providers, as this will provide assurance they are properly
trained, supported, professionally supervised, insured and working within agreed
policy frameworks and standards, and accountable to a professional body with a
clearly articulated complaints procedure. Self-reported claims of efficacy are not
enough, and schools should be very careful not to use resources to support
interventions that may have little impact or potentially exacerbate pupil mental health
problems. Further guidance on good commissioning, based on evidence from the
DfE, can be found in Chapter 5.
4.11 It is important that schools are aware of how and when to access their local
support services. Local voluntary and community sector (VCS) organisations can
offer valuable services, either working directly with pupils and their families, or
offering support and advice to schools.
4.12 The school nursing service is confidential, and not limited to term time, so can
provide the opportunity for early identification of physical, emotional or mental health
needs. Schools may wish to commission extra support from school nurses and their
teams, who can:
Build trusting and enduring professional relationships with children and young
people throughout their time in education.
Support the interaction between health and education working with schools to
provide public health expertise. They can work with mental health support
teams to identify vulnerable children, young people and carers, and provide a
response through tailored packages of coordinated support, referring to other
services when appropriate.
Engage with children and their families in their own homes; which can further
enable early identification and interventions to mitigate problems worsening in
the future, thus contributing to demand management in areas of statutory
requirements.
Working collaboratively with other schools
4.13 Where schools are organised in clusters or run by Multi-Academy Trusts, they
should consider collectively commissioning specialist support for identifying and
supporting pupils with mental health needs. Such support could take the form of
23
mental health workers, social workers or educational psychologists. They may also
consider providing opportunities for groups of staff to be trained jointly on identifying
and meeting mental health needs; thereby providing opportunities to share good
practice and learn from one another.
Referring serious cases to CYPMHS
4.14 The specific services offered by CYPMHS vary depending on the needs of the
local area. The best way to influence those services overall is to get involved with the
local health and wellbeing board, as detailed above.
4.15 Schools have told us, however, that several things can be helpful to them in
referring pupils effectively to specialist CYPMHS and otherwise working well with the
service for the benefit of their vulnerable pupils. These include:
using a clear process for identifying children in need of further support (such
as the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire or Boxall Profile - for further
information see Chapter 5);
documenting evidence of the symptoms or behaviour that are causing
concern (and including this with the referral);
encouraging the pupil and their parents/carers to speak to their GP or school
nurse, where appropriate;
working with local specialist CYPMHS to make the referral process as quick
and efficient as possible - for example by being clear who can refer, by
ensuring schools have access to the relevant forms and by sharing
information about when decisions will be taken and fed back;
understanding the criteria that will be used by specialist CYPMHS in
determining whether a particular pupil needs their services;
having a close working relationship with local specialist CYPMHS, including
knowing who to call to discuss a possible referral and allowing pupils to
access CYPMHS professionals at school; and
consulting CYPMHS about the most effective things the school can do to
support children whose needs aren't so severe that they require specialist
CYPMHS.
Working with parents and carers
4.16 Evidence shows that where support is provided to help manage behaviour at
home, alongside work being carried out with the child at school, there is a much
greater likelihood of success in reducing the child's problems, and in supporting their
academic and emotional development. Many support services will provide this
support as well as that for the child.
24
4.17 Surveys show that a large proportion of pupils and families²⁷ are not aware of
the mental health support available in their school; and many indicate that the
information on what the school provides is one of the most useful resources to
support their child's mental health. It is important that schools make all aware what
support is available.
4.18 Whilst it is good practice to involve families wherever possible, in some
circumstances the child may not wish to have their families involved with any
interventions or therapies they are receiving. In these cases schools should be
aware that those aged 16 or over are presumed to be capable of consenting to their
own medical treatment, and any ancillary procedures involved in that treatment (by
virtue of section 8 of the Family Law Reform Act 1969). Children under the age of 16
may in certain circumstances consent to their own treatment if they are deemed to
be 'Gillick competent', i.e. a relevant medical professional judges that they have
sufficient intelligence, competence and understanding to appreciate what is involved
in their treatment. Otherwise, an adult with parental responsibility can consent for
them
2829
Working with Alternative Provision (AP)
4.19 Local authorities are responsible for arranging suitable education for
permanently excluded pupils, and for other pupils who because of illness or other
reasons including social, emotional and mental health needs, would not receive
suitable education without such provision
4.20 Routes into AP include off-site direction from schools to improve a child's
behaviour; and referrals from the NHS, as a result of a child's physical or mental
health needs. In cases of health needs, local authorities are normally responsible for
commissioning provision. Provision will differ from pupil to pupil, but there are some
common elements that AP should aim to achieve, including the below:
good pupil motivation and self-confidence, attendance and engagement with
education; and
clearly defined objectives, including the next steps following the placement
such as reintegration into mainstream education, further education, training or
employment.
27
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/pupils-and-their-parents-or-carers-omnibus-wave-1
survey
28 https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/consent-to-treatment/children/
29
https://www.cgc.org.uk/guidance-providers/gps/nigels-surgery-8-gilick-competency-fraser-
guidelines
25
4.21 There is clear evidence that schools can, and do, play a vital role in
supporting these children to engage in education. This can include identifying special
educational needs and mental health needs at an early stage and working jointly with
partner agencies in health and children's social care, educational psychology, and
children and young people's mental health services.
4.22 Schools and AP settings should also work together to develop a plan for
reintegration of the pupil's return to mainstream education, where this is considered
appropriate. To facilitate reintegration, information should be shared between
schools and AP providers; this should lead to clear plans with baselines against
which to measure progress (including towards reintegration into mainstream
schooling, further education, or employment). Where children have SEN, these plans
will link to 'Education, Health and Care Plans'.
4.23 For young people who at the end of Year 11 are still in AP, the school should
work with the provider to ensure that the young person can move on into suitable
education, or employment alongside part-time study or training whilst providing
ongoing arrangements to support mental wellbeing.
26
Chapter 5 - Where to find out more
Transforming Children and Young People's Mental Health
provision: Green Paper
5.1
As set out in Chapter 4, it is important that schools are aware of the local
services available, in order to ensure they are able to draw on them when required.
The measures set out in the Green Paper³⁰ will provide further support schools to do
this. The new Mental Health Support Teams will be established in 20-25% of
England by 2023. Trailblazer areas will start work in 2019-20 and will test this model.
They will improve collaboration between schools and specialist services, providing a
wider range of support and interventions in or near schools and colleges. The teams
will be linked to groups of schools and colleges, and will work closely with other
professionals such as educational psychologists, school nurses, counsellors, social
workers and others to assess and refer children for other specialist treatments if
necessary.
5.2
Mental Health Support Teams will work with the Designated Senior Leads for
Mental Health which schools are encouraged to put in place. These staff will have
access to free of charge training in providing strategic oversight of the whole school
approach to mental health and wellbeing. This should include how it is reflected in
the design of behaviour policies, curriculum and pastoral support, how staff are
supported with their own mental wellbeing and how pupils and parents are engaged.
Further information
5.3
Links to further frameworks, tools and resources are provided in table 2
below. We have only listed national services, but schools should also ensure they
look for local services available (including those listed in the local authority's 'local
offer' of services in the area to support children with SEND³¹).
https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/transforming-children-and-young-peoples-mental-
health-provision-a-green-paper
31 http://www.thelocaloffer.co.uk/the-local-offer-by-local-authority
27
Table 2 - Sources of support and information
Creating a whole
Creating a culture: how school leaders can optimise behaviour - Tom Bennett's independent
school culture
review on behaviour in schools, which looked at leadership, culture and methods to improve pupil
behaviour
Promoting children and young people's emotional health and wellbeing - Public Health
England's guidance for head teachers and college principals on the eight principles for promoting
emotional health and wellbeing in schools and colleges
A whole school framework for emotional wellbeing and mental health - The National Children's
Bureau's self-assessment and improvement tool for school leaders, to support them in implementing a
whole school approach for emotional wellbeing and mental health.
Supporting mental health in schools and colleges: pen portraits of provision - this report
presents pen portraits of mental health provision based on case study research in 36 schools, colleges
and other educational institutions across England
Mentally Healthy Schools - is recommended by NAHT, and brings together quality-assured
information, advice and resources to help primary schools understand and promote children's mental
health and wellbeing.
What works for wellbeing - work with a network of researchers, think tanks, businesses, government
departments and non-profits to provide evidence, guidance and discussion papers on a range of
subjects, including community wellbeing and measuring wellbeing.
Children's Society - provide a range of research tools to support schools to talk to pupils about
wellbeing and mental health.
Supporting staff wellbeing in schools - aims to give school staff and senior leadership teams
simple guidance and good practical examples where schools have successfully implemented staff
wellbeing strategies.
Supporting and
Royal College of Psychiatrists (RCPSYCH) - Provide specifically tailored information for young
promoting positive
people, parents, teachers and carers about mental health through their Parents and Youth Info A-Z.
mental health
(including early
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) - NICE's role is to improve outcomes for
intervention and
people using the NHS and other public health and social care services, including by producing
supporting children
evidence-based guidance and advice. This can be useful in understanding social, emotional and
through difficult life
mental health conditions and their recommended treatments.
events)
British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy (BACP) - Register of Counsellors and
Psychotherapists which is accredited by the Department of Health and Social Care.
Young Minds - Young Minds is charity committed to improving the emotional wellbeing and mental
health of children and young people. They undertake campaigns and research, make resources
available to professionals (including teachers) and run a helpline for adults worried about the
emotional problems, behaviour or mental health of anyone up to the age of 25. They also offer a
catalogue of resources for commissioning support services.
Nasen SEND Gateway - an online portal offering education professionals free, easy access to high
quality information, resources and training for meeting the needs of children with special educational
needs and disabilities (SEND), including a large number of specific mental health resources.
Schools in Mind - a free network for school staff and allied professionals which shares practical,
academic and clinical expertise regarding the wellbeing and mental health issues that affect schools.
MindEd - provides free e-learning to help adults to identify and understand children and young people
with mental health problems. It provides simple, clear guidance on mental health to adults who work
with children and young people, to help them support the development of young healthy minds.
Counselling MindEd - Counselling MindEd is an online resource within MindEd that provides free
evidence-based, e-learning to support the training of school and youth counsellors and supervisors
working in a wide variety of settings.
29
PSHE Teacher Guidance: Preparing to teach about mental health and emotional wellbeing -
Has been produced by the PSHE Association. It provides guidance for schools on teaching about
mental health and emotional wellbeing as part of PSHE and signposts to organisations that can
provide support for specific mental health conditions.
Sexual violence and sexual harassment between children in schools and colleges -
departmental advice which amongst other things includes detailed guidance on supporting victims of
peer on peer sexual violence.
Bullying and mental health: Guidance for teachers and other professionals - Free resource
produced by the Anti-Bullying Alliance to help schools, teachers and other professionals understand
the issues around bullying and mental health for children and young people.
ChildLine - A confidential service, provided by the NSPCC, offering free support for children and
young people up to the age of nineteen on a wide variety of problems.
Place2Be - Place2Be is a charity working in schools providing early intervention mental health
support to children aged 4-14 in England, Scotland and Wales.
Play Therapy UK (PTUK) - is a not-for-profit professional organisation with registrants located all over
the UK, many working in primary schools, alleviating social, emotional, behaviour and mental health
problems. The Register managed by PTUK is accredited by the Professional Standards Authority,
providing an assurance of the quality of the Registrant's work.
Relate - Relate offers advice, relationship counselling, workshops, mediation, consultations and
support face-to-face, by phone and through their website. This includes counselling for any child or
young person who is having problems.
Women's Aid - is the national domestic violence charity that works to end violence again women and
children and supports domestic and sexual violence services across the country. They provide
services to support abused women and children such as The HideOut, a website to help children and
young people.
30
Nurture UK - is dedicated to improving the mental health and wellbeing of children and young people,
and removing barriers to education by promoting nurture in education.
Trauma Informed Schools UK - provides training for schools, communities and organisations to
become trauma informed and mentally healthy places for all.
Early Intervention Foundation guidebook - on trauma-focused cognitive behavioural therapy.
Beat Eating Disorders UK - provides information on what to do if you're worried about a friend,
family member or pupil, along with how to support someone with an eating disorder.
Child Bereavement UK - provides information and resources to support bereaved pupils, schools
and staff.
Young Minds - Young Carers - information about how to spot if young carers need support, and
how to get help.
Information about
MindEd - provides free online teaching to help adults to identify and understand children and young
mental health
people with mental health problems. It provides simple, clear guidance on mental health to adults who
conditions,
work with children and young people, to help them support the development of young healthy minds.
identification and
measurement
Health A-Z - Conditions and treatments by subject - Mental health disorders - information from
the NHS on mental health disorders.
Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) - the SDQ can assist schools in taking an overview
and making a judgement about whether a pupil is likely to be suffering from a mental health problem.
Boxall Profile - an online assessment tool for social emotional and behavioural difficulties for children
and young people.
Education Endowment Foundation - The Sutton Trust-EEF Teaching and Learning Toolkit is an
accessible summary of educational research which provides guidance for teachers and schools on
how to use their resources to improve the attainment of all pupils and especially disadvantaged pupils.
31
CORC outcome and experience measurements - provides easily accessible resources for
individuals looking for information on how to measure children and young people's mental health and
wellbeing
Good Childhood Wellbeing Index - is an easy and free to run simple assessment of children's well-
being in the classroom.
Measuring and monitoring children and young people's mental wellbeing: a toolkit for schools
and colleges - this toolkit aims to raise awareness amongst school and college staff of the range of
validated tools that are available to help measure subjective mental wellbeing amongst the pupil
population.
Commissioning
Youth Wellbeing Directory - provides a list of local and national organisations for anyone up to the
services directly
age of 25 (including teachers helping pupils to find support), along with additional important
information and support.
BOND: Learning from Practice Review - This report from BOND sets out the findings of an
evidence based practice review, exploring the nature of the relationship between the voluntary &
community sector and commissioners (Schools, NHS, LA), with a focus on the delivery of early
intervention mental health services for children and young people).
School nursing public health services - guidance produced by the Department of Health and
Social Care and Public Health England. This guidance supports effective commissioning of school
nursing services to provide public health for school aged children.
Supporting public health: children, young people and families - documents to support local
authorities and providers in commissioning and delivering children's public health services aged 0 to
19 years.
32
Working with parents
The strongest evidence supports working with parents/carers in a structured way to address behavioural
issues through education and training programmes such as:
Triple P - which gives parents simple and practical strategies to help them build strong, healthy
relationships, confidently manage their children's behavior and prevent problems developing.
The Incredible Years - a series of interlocking, evidence-based programs for parents, children, and
teachers, supported by over 30 years of research, which aims to prevent and treat young children's
behavior problems and promote their social, emotional, and academic competence.
MindEd for Families - advice and information from trusted experts to help improve understanding of
mental health problems, and how parents and carers can best support their families.
Supporting children
HeadMeds - website developed by the charity YoungMinds providing general information about
with medical conditions
common medications that may be prescribed for children and young people with mental health
conditions.
Health Conditions in Schools Alliance - this website offers guidance and tools to schools who are
looking after children with health conditions. This includes a template medical conditions policy; a
sample individual healthcare plan and advice on what it should contain; and a process for making sure
children who require education in different settings get the support they need.
33
Department
for Education
© Crown copyright 2018
This publication (not including logos) is licensed under the terms of the Open
Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. Where we have identified any
third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright
holders concerned.
To view this licence:
visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3
email
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk
write to
Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London, TW9 4DU
About this publication:
enquiries www.education.gov.uk/contactus
download www.gov.uk/government/publications
Reference:
DFE-00327-2018
Follow us on Twitter:
f
Like us on Facebook:
@educationgovuk
facebook.com/educationgovuk
