Ordinarily available SEND provision
Guidance on the provision that early years settings and
mainstream schools need to make for children and
young people with special educational needs and/or
disabilities in Oxfordshire to support inclusive practice.
OXFORDSHIRE
COUNTY COUNCIL
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Foreword
Ordinarily available SEND provision aims to support
schools and settings in Oxfordshire to identify, plan for
and meet the needs of children and young people who
have special educational needs or disabilities (SEND) and
require reasonable adjustments or additional provision
at SEN support level.
In education, inclusive practice means designing and
delivering learning experiences that accommodate the
diverse needs of all students. This includes minimising or
removing barriers to learning, ensuring accessibility, and
promoting equality and diversity.
An inclusive setting is one that actively promotes
participation and reduces the barriers that children and
young people with SEND may experience while they are in
their care.
All schools and settings should have a clear approach to
early identification and a clear response to children and
young people's SEND as part of their universal offer.
Ordinarily available SEND provision should be read
alongside the SEND Code of Practice 2015.
2
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Contents
1) Principles of inclusion
4
2) High quality, inclusive teaching and learning
6
3) Identification of SEND
10
4) SEN Support²
11
5) Education, Health and Care Plans³
11
6) Working with parents⁴
12
7) Voice of the child or young person
12
8) Early years settings and school-based roles and responsibilities
13
9) The graduated response also known as assess-plan-do-review°.
16
(i) Assess
17
(ii) Plan
18
(iii) Do
18
(iv) Review
19
10) The four broad areas of need⁶
20
(i) Communication and Interaction
20
(ii) Cognition and Learning
20
(iii) Social, Emotional and Mental Health (SEMH)
21
(iv) Sensory and/or Physical
21
11) SEND support strategies by category of need
22
(i) Communication and Interaction (C&I) needs
22
(ii) Cognition and Learning (C&L)
27
(iii) Social, Emotional and Mental Health Difficulties (SEMH)
35
(iv) Sensory and Physical Needs (S&P)
40
12) National guidance
46
3
Ordinarily available SEND provision
1) Principles of inclusion
Every child or young person is entitled to:
A rounded education with access to and
A good education that enables them to
benefiting from a breadth of experience and
maximise opportunity and success in learning
cultural capital.
and life, irrespective of need, prior attainment,
A strong commitment to early intervention and
background or circumstance.
prevention to tackle, diminish or avert potential
Strong pathways into further education,
barriers to success.
training, employment and independent living.
A strong commitment to partnership
Successful and fulfilling participation in society,
working which actively seeks and values the
economic prosperity, good physical and mental
contributions of parent/carers and children and
health.
young people.
Access to suitable, high-quality provision,
Education in their local community wherever
which meets diverse need and diminishes
possible.
barriers to participation and engagement.
Their special education needs being seen as
Equity of access and onward life chances;
a difference or neurodivergence rather than a
shortcoming or weakness.
those who need something more or something
different in order to realise this ambition do
Freedom to build, negotiate and maintain an
receive something more or something different.
extensive range of authentic relationships.
This guidance should be read alongside the SEND Code of Practice 2015 which defines SEND (page 15-16)
and sets out the following responsibilities:
Local authority
Monitor the progress of children
Prepare and maintain an
responsibilities
and young people with SEND and
accessibility strategy to
work with early years providers
and schools to resolve issues
increase the extent to
regarding the progress of children
which disabled pupils
and young people with SEND,
can participate in the
curriculum
wherever they are educated.
Make arrangements for the
improve the physical
statutory assessment of pupils and
environment of the
maintain and review statements of
Co-produce provision and policy
schools for the purpose
SEND and Education, Health and
with families of children with
of increasing the extent
Care (EHC) Plans.
SEND and with children and
to which disabled
young people with SEND.
pupils are able to take
Maintain an overview of the
advantage of education
Provide information, advice and
extent that education settings are
and benefits, facilities
support to parents of children
accessible for pupils with SEND.
or services provided or
and young people with SEND
offered by the schools
and young people themselves,
Publish information on SEND
including the provision of a
improve the delivery
funding and provision.
statutory information, advice
to disabled pupils of
information which is
and support service (SENDIASS)
Ensure sufficiency of provision for
along with mediation and
readily accessible to
pupils with SEND and keep under
resolution services, and the
pupils who are not
disabled.
constant review.
Local Offer.
4
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Governors, early years
providers, schools
and colleges¹
responsibilities
Ensure that staff have the
Ensure SEND provision
requisite skills, training and
is integrated into the
understanding to meet the
organisational improvement
needs of children and young
or development plan.
Aim to meet the range of
people with SEND.
children and young people's
needs in their locality as far
as is appropriate.
Identify children and young
Keep arrangements for
people with SEND and ensure
prospective and current
provision is made in line with
pupils with a disability under
Work with families of children
the SEND Code of Practice
constant review.
and young people with SEND
2015 and complying with the
and the children and young
Children and Families Act 2014.
people themselves to shape
Monitor the progress of
provision and policy.
children and young people
Publish a SEND information
with SEND to ensure the
Review and analyse
report, a SEND policy and an
provision specified in EHC
information on SEND funding
accessibility plan on the school
plans is in place and the child
website.
or young person is making
and provision and monitor
progress.
expenditure.
Maintain a record of pupils
Appoint a SEND governor
with identified SEND.
(schools: statutory, early years
settings recommended) and
SEND coordinator.
¹6.79 to 6.83 SEND Code of Practice 2015
5
Ordinarily available SEND provision
2) High quality, inclusive teaching and learning
High quality teaching is effective for all children. All teachers and practitioners are
teachers of children and young people with SEND.
EHCNA*
Where the child or young person may require
provision that is consistently over and above
High quality
that which can be provided at SEN Support
inclusive
level, an EHCNA* should be considered.
provision
for all
children
and young
people
If, despite intervention at SEN Support level and planning over
a suitable period of time, the child or young person makes little
or no progress, the support should be reviewed, adapted, and
changed in discussion with parents/carers as part of an effective
graduated response. Specialist advice may be sought.
SEN Support level
A plan** informed by the graduated response***
is put in place
Child or young person is noted to be making progress that is
less than would be typically expected so further information
regarding the child or young person's strengths and needs is
gathered in partnership with parent/carers to identify if
SEN Support is needed at SEN Support level.
Universal
High quality inclusive and adaptive teaching and
provision for all children and young people
*
Education Health and Care Needs Assessment
**
Examples include a pupil profile/pupil passport/all about me/SEN Support plan etc.
*** See graduated response programme diagram in section 9
6
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Statutory EYFS (Early Years Foundation Stage)
In planning and guiding what children learn,
covers the education and care of all children,
practitioners must reflect on the different
including children with special educational
rates at which children are developing and
needs and disabilities (SEND).
adjust their practice appropriately. Three
characteristics of effective teaching and
The EYFS states: All children deserve high
learning are:
quality early education and care (1.19) and
highlights that play is essential for children's
Playing and exploring - children investigate
development, building their confidence as
and experience things, and 'have a go'.
they learn to explore, relate to others, set their
own goals, and solve problems.
Active learning - children concentrate and
keep on trying if they encounter difficulties
Children learn by leading their own play, and
and enjoy achievements.
by taking part in play and learning that is
guided by adults. Practitioners need to decide
Creating and thinking critically - children
what they want children in their setting to
have and develop their own ideas, make links
learn, and the most effective ways to teach
between ideas, and develop strategies for
it. Practitioners must stimulate children's
doing things (1.18).
interests, responding to each child's emerging
needs and guiding their development through
warm, positive interactions coupled with
secure routines for play and learning (1.16).
7
Ordinarily available SEND provision
The Education Endowment Foundation (EEF)
1. Create a positive and supportive
guidance report Special Educational Needs
environment for all pupils without exception
in Mainstream Schools states that supporting
children and young people with SEND should be
High expectations of all children and young
part of a proactive approach to supporting all
people asking the question 'what is it that I/
pupils, not an 'add-on'.
we need to do differently in order to help this
child or young person access the learning and
It sets out five key strategies aimed at
achieve success?'
supporting pupils with SEND.
Staff understanding special education needs as
1. Create a positive and supportive
a difference or neurodivergence rather than a
environment for all pupils without exception
shortcoming or weakness.
2. Build an ongoing, holistic understanding
Use of language and terminology that doesn't
of your pupils and their needs
have negative connotations or suggest a 'deficit'.
Ensuring child's wellbeing needs are met so that
3. Ensure all pupils have access to high
they are in 'the right place' emotionally to learn.
quality teaching
Fostering independence and positive
4. Complement high quality teaching with
relationships.
carefully selected small group and
Strong, positive relationships within the
one-to-one interventions
learning environment.
5. Work effectively with teaching assistants
A physical environment which is conducive to
learning, taking into account such aspects as
Research from the EEF identifies five specific
sensory needs.
approaches (the 'five-a-day' principle) which
Effective, skilled learning environment
teachers can integrate daily into their practice to
management.
support learning and improve outcomes for all
children and young people, including those with
SEND. Teachers should use these as a starting
2. Build an ongoing, holistic understanding
point for classroom teaching for all children and
of your pupils and their needs
young people, including those with SEND.
Setting staff knowing the needs and contexts
The five approaches are:
of children and young people and the
Explicit instruction
characteristics of learners with such contexts,
whilst not stereotyping or applying a label in
Cognitive and metacognitive strategies
a way which might have a negative impact on
Utilising scaffolding
expectations or opportunities.
Flexible grouping
On-going, responsive, diagnostic assessment,
observation, monitoring and review that
Using technology
informs and shapes the teaching and learning.
Many of the strategies included in this document
Use of a wide range of observation, assessment,
form part of high-quality teaching and learning
and feedback tools including self and peer
approaches. High-quality teaching considers the
assessment.
barriers to learning and how these can be overcome.
Skilled pedagogical intervention; using
Although not exhaustive, the following are key
knowledge of how children and young people
features of high-quality, inclusive teaching and
learn to craft and re-shape learning experiences.
provision:
8
Ordinarily available SEND provision
3. Ensure all pupils have access
Explicit teaching of how to use different
to high quality teaching
resources to support learning.
Appropriate use of modern technology such
Access to a broad curriculum and to learning
as programmes designed for problem-solving
which is sequential, cohesive, relevant and
and open-ended learning for children and
contextualised.
young people as well as resources to support
Skilled, open-ended and hinge questioning;
teaching such as interactive boards and
asking the right questions at the right time
learning platforms.
Modelling to reveal the thought processes of an
'expert' learner to aid understanding and help
develop metacognitive skills.
4. Complement high quality teaching
with carefully selected small group and
Dedicated teaching of metacognitive skills;
one-to-one interventions.
helping children and young people to
understand how they learn and to make
decisions about learning, in order to problem-
5. Work effectively with teaching assistants
solve and select the most effective learning
strategies for different tasks/contexts.
Skilled deployment of any additional adults
Building on prior knowledge, understanding,
with appropriate training and clear, focused
skills and ideas which children and young
remits to support learning, independence,
people bring to new and subsequent learning
metacognition and self-regulation.
opportunities and experiences.
The impact of any adjustments,
Embedding key skills and understandings
personalisation, intervention or support
to gain fluency and mastery across different
critically evaluated, with these evaluations
contexts of learning.
used to inform subsequent teaching and
Opportunities to elaborate on learning; to use
learning.
describing and explaining which helps integrate
Pre-teaching which acknowledges the different
new information with prior knowledge and
starting points of children and young people
embed it in memory.
and attempts to enable all children and young
Planned sequences and cycles of learning
people to access the core teaching and learning
which facilitate mastery.
from the main lesson(s).
Flexibility in teaching and learning to adjust
and personalise in response to children
and young people, while ensuring that any
long-term and generic adaptation is always
available, practised routinely and part of
everyday adjustment if needed.
The explicit teaching of key vocabulary or
modelling with intent, to assist in conceptual
understanding and building knowledge.
A range of resources and strategies are
evident in planning and delivery - visual aids,
concrete and visual resources, hands-on and
experiential opportunities, use of symbols,
pictures and colour, use of memory aids, visual
stimuli, songs and rhymes, etc.
9
Ordinarily available SEND provision
3) Identification of SEND
It is a national expectation that all schools and settings have a clear, defined approach to
identifying and responding to SEND; good practice would be to use a strengths and needs
approach. For further information about an effective approach to early identification of SEND
see the SEND Code of Practice 2015 or the Early Years Guide to the SEND Code of Practice.
If, for example, despite consistently high-quality
Other questions that a school or setting may
teaching and learning, a child or a young person
wish to consider include:
experiences difficulties in accessing the same
learning as their peers of a broadly similar age
How might the classroom/setting environment/
or needs much greater support in social and
layout be changed to better accommodate the
emotional aspects of learning and development,
needs of all?
there may be an underlying need.
How might additional resources such as visual
In deciding whether to make special educational
representations make learning more accessible
provision at SEN Support level, the special
to all?
educational needs coordinator (SENDCO) in
Is the deployment of additional adults
discussion with teacher(s), the child or young
effective? Have they had the training they
person and their family, should consider all the
need to enhance learning whilst nurturing the
information gathered about the child or young
independence of the child or young person?
person's progress. This will help to determine
the support that is needed and whether it can
Is assessment effective and leading to
be provided by adapting the setting's core
an accurate understanding of need, both
educational and wider outcomes?
(universal) offer or whether something 'different
or additional' is required.
Is there consistent, universal high-quality
Good practice is to reflect on the impact of
teaching and learning?
strategies and support already in place as part of
How good are the relationships between adults
high-quality inclusive teaching and learning, to
and the children and young people?
consider what else might be beneficial by asking
Are there other factors impacting on the child
'how do I need to change my teaching or my
or young person's development that may need
approach, how might I change the provision or
support?
environment/ resources?', rather than describing
how the child or young person needs to change.
Would the family benefit from use of a
Strengths and Needs form? https://www.oscb.
org.uk/early-help-forms-tools/
Does information from parents/carers,
early years practitioners, school/setting
assessments, health, education or social care
professionals indicate that a child or young
person's developmental progress is slower
and outside the typical range that would be
expected for other children or young people of
the same age?
The SEND Indicators Tool can support this practice.
10
Ordinarily available SEND provision
4) SEN Support2
5) Education, Health
and Care Plans³
If assessments and other information
gathered indicate that a child or young person
needs provision beyond universal high-
The vast majority of children will have their
quality teaching and learning, the next level is
needs appropriately met using the approaches
and strategies set out in this document at a SEN
SEN Support.
Support level.
This guidance focuses on SEN support, which
Only those with the most exceptional level of
is broadly the adaptations, adjustments and
needs will require a statutory assessment of their
additionality that should be ordinarily available
SEND and provision to be made in accordance
within every mainstream school to support
with an EHC Plan in order to meet needs.
children and young people with SEND.
There is delegated funding for primary and
There is an expectation that the school will have
secondary mainstream schools for SEND.
already tried to meet the child or young person's
The national expectation that up to £6,000 of
needs through universal high-quality teaching and
additional provision can be made, for those who
learning, making reasonable adjustments and/or
need it, each year. This funding can be used
additional provision at SEN Support level, using a
flexibly by a school to develop provision which
graduated response, over a suitable period of time
benefits a wide group of students, for example a
before requesting an Education, Health and Care
nurture hub.
Needs Assessment (EHCNA).
For children in nursery classes and early years
settings there is funding available on a case-
by-case basis for children with low level and/or
emerging needs and children with more complex
high-level needs. Nursery classes and early years
settings are not expected to pay the first £6,000
for any additional SEND provision and can claim
up to the child's full educational entitlement in
line with their needs.
For further information on Early Education
funding for children with SEND go to:
www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/residents/children-
education-and-families/information-parents/find-
childcare/help-paying-childcare/funding-children-
send
and
www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/business/information-
providers/childrens-services-providers/sen-
support-providers/guidance-and-procedures
2 Please refer to inclusive support series for more detail
11
Ordinarily available SEND provision
6) Working with parents⁴
7) Voice of the child
Parent/carers know their children in different
or young person
situations, with different people and across
a range of contexts and environments. Their
Children and young people need to be
views and insights are invaluable to the
empowered to express their views and feelings.
identification/assess/plan/do/review process.
Consideration needs to be given to how these
Parent/carers must be and feel involved in
are meaningfully gathered on an individual basis,
processes and empowered to support their child
for example an early years children or non verbal
or young person's needs. There needs to be
child's views can and should still be gathered via
acknowledgement from all that a child or young
observation and talking to parents and carers.
person's needs and the perceptions of their needs
These should be given due weight according to
may be very different in different contexts but
age, maturity and capability.
that each context is of equal importance.
Most children and young person will find it easier
to think about the present rather than far into the
Sometimes parent/carers may feel anxious about
their child's needs and/or about how their child is
future. In early years it is important to observe
the child and communicate with parents/carers in
perceived by their peers or setting staff. Working
order to capture the views of the child, the child's
proactively in partnership with parent/carers to
interests and strengths and what adjustments
listen and to engage in joint problem- solving/
assist them to learn and develop. As they grow
decision-making is effective practice, which
benefits the child or young person, family and
older, wherever possible ask the child or young
person about what they enjoy, what they feel
wider setting or school community.
they are good at and anything they find harder,
At times, parent/carers, early years practitioners/
what helps them to learn, what is going well
teachers and others may have differing views
and what could be better. Their answers will be
about how a child or young person's needs are
the building blocks for gathering their views for
best met and indeed whether those needs are
more formal purposes. We need to ask children
additional and may be identified as SEND. These
and young people about how they want to be
different perspectives can be very helpful in
involved and to give their views, offering flexible
gaining a full understanding of a child or young
options as far as possible.
person's needs, strengths and behaviours, and
of the various support strategies that may be
Managers of early years settings and
headteachers will want to think about how how
helpful to them. Sometimes discussions can
be challenging. Being child-centred, flexible,
to ensure the views of children or young people
are an integral part of the school/setting's overall
strengths-based and solution-focused is key to any
culture. They should ensure that children and
discussion, challenging or otherwise, that parents/
carers and schools may have with each other.
young people with SEND are involved in planning
and decision-making on the support they receive
for their needs. It is vital to gain the child or
young person's viewpoint and perspective of
their lived experiences.
3 Please refer to Guidance on 'Requesting an EHC needs assessment' for more detail
4 Please refer to SENDIASS guidance
12
Ordinarily available SEND provision
8) Early years settings and school-based
roles and responsibilities
Although there are some specific role related responsibilities, meeting the
needs of children and young people with SEND is everyone's responsibility.
Governors
responsibilities /early
Publication of SEND
It is expected that governors/early
years committees
information (including the
years committees regularly receive a
SEND information report) on
range of information specific to the
the setting/school website
SEND cohort in their setting/school,
about the implementation of
as well as progress and attainment.
Strategic oversight of
their policy for children and
This should increase highlight
young people with SEND.
indicators such as attendance rates,
SEND provision.
including persistent absenteeism, use
of reduced hours provision (part-time
Ensuring adherence to the
timetables), exclusions and violent
Strategic monitoring and
SEND code of practice and
incidents should also be reported to
evaluating of budgetary
should promotion of best
governors/early years committees for
decisions, the quality of
practice in SEND.
various groups of children and young
provision and the broad
people, including those with SEND,
educational outcomes for
so that a more rounded picture of
those with SEND.
inclusivity, effectiveness of provision
and impact can be gained.
Headteachers/early years
managers/supervisors
responsibilities
Alongside early years
committees/governors, ensure
Leads on the culture within a
that SEND provision at a
setting/school; set the standard,
strategic level is monitored and
modelling the expectation of
evaluated routinely, within the
inclusivity and meeting the
school/setting's overall quality
Have overall strategic oversight
needs of all children and young
assurance framework. This
of the effective and consistent
people. In good schools/ settings
should focus on the impact of
implementation of the SEND policy
headteachers/early years
SEND provision on outcomes
across the school. This will include
managers/supervisors are the
and be used to inform
ensuring frontline practitioners are
champions of all children and
subsequent policy, procedure
appropriately trained and skilled to
young people; good settings/
and practice, including the
meet the range of need within the
schools are good for all children
identification of any areas for
setting/school.
and young people.
improvement.
13
Ordinarily available SEND provision
SENDCOs
The SEND code of practice
Provides leadership and
responsibilities
states that group settings
such as pre-schools and
professional guidance to
day nurseries are expected
colleagues.
to identify a SENDCO, and
childminders are encouraged
Ensure all staff are aware
to identify a person to act as
of children and young
Model inclusivity and
SENDCO.
people's individual needs and
best practice in teaching,
provision, that there is good,
curricular provision, the
frequent liaison with parent/
environment and resources,
In schools (including
carers, that the package
to support strong outcomes.
maintained nursery schools)
of support is cohesive and
the SENDCO must be a
understood by all.
qualified teacher working at
Settings must have
the school and should be part
arrangements in place
of the senior leadership team.
Keep up to date with SEND-
to support children with
related research and policy,
special education needs and
updating parents and
disabilities (SEND).
Must be a qualified teacher
colleagues and informing
working at the school and
policy and practice.
should be part of the senior
leadership team.
Lead early years practitioners/teachers
responsibilities
Leader of provision for SEND
at the point of delivery in the
classroom.
Know which children and
Deliver universal, high-quality
young people in their class
Tailor provision to meet need,
teaching for all.
has SEND, the nature and
with expertise and guidance
level of that SEND and the
from the SENDCO as and
current plan to support the
when appropriate.
Meet the needs of all children
children and young people's
in their setting/class.
needs needs.
Identify and effectively use
resources to provide the
Have oversight of any
Have high aspirations for and
adjustments and adaptations
additional adults working
expectations of children and
a children or young person
with the class.
young people with SEND.
may require.
14
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Early years support worker/
practitioner/teaching assistants
responsibilities
In early years settings, the
early years practitioner,
usually the child's key
person, remains responsible
for working with the child
on a daily basis. With
Support the child or young
support from the SENDCO,
person to be as independent
Do not replace the teacher
they should oversee the
in their learning as possible.
for a child or young person
implementation of the
with SEND but enhance the
interventions or programmes
teaching, with the child or
agreed as part of SEN
Under the direction of the
young person continuing
Support. The SENDCO should
early years lead practitioner/
to retain direct access to
support the practitioner
class teacher, deliver
the high-quality teaching
in assessing the child's
short, intensive spells of
of the most qualified and
response to the action
one to one or small group
lead professional in the
taken, problem solving and
interventions.
classroom.
advising on the effective
implementation of support.
(SEND Code of Practice 2015).
Peers
responsibilities
A key part of an inclusive culture providing support to each other in learning and development.
15
Ordinarily available SEND provision
9) The graduated response also known as
assess-plan-do-review5
Regularly discuss whether the
support is making a difference and
if the plan needs to change.
Discuss how effective the additional
Work out the strengths and
provision has been and the impact
needs of the child or young
on the child or young person.
person and specifically what
Review assessments before &
they need help and support
after the additional provision /
with through observations,
intervention
discussions, assessments,
child or young person's views
Think collaboratively about next
and parent/carer views.
steps with the family.
Review
Assess
The graduated response
Do
Plan
Implement the plan as agreed
Plan the support to be provided
Observe and record impact of
by the school or setting, parents/
support and progress over time.
carers and other professionals.
Link additional intervention /
Create SMART outcomes in
support into everyday learning.
partnership with parents/carers.
Outline support needed using
a provision map or timetable of
support.
16
Ordinarily available SEND provision
From the SEND code of practice, schools
Parents/carers must be informed of any special
and settings must:
educational provision being implemented
to meet their child or young person's needs.
Identify children and young people who are
Parents should be actively involved and informed
not making progress in learning in learning
throughout the whole process of planning to meet
Assess the needs of children and young
the individual child's SEN.
people, including any special educational need
The school/early years setting should use the
Plan and deliver provision to help children
SEND Indicators Tool, Oxfordshire's ordinarily
and young people overcome their difficulties
available SEND provision, information on
Review the provision to understand if
the SEND framework and the guidance and
adjustments and support have helped or are
procedures pages to inform identification and
helping the children and young people to
planning of suitable provision and support for
overcome difficulties
children and young people.
Involve parent/carers and children and
It is good practice to review the indicators for all
young people in planning and reviewing any
relevant areas of need to make sure that support
adjustments or support that is put in place;
is tailored appropriately.
securing parent/carer and children and young
people input throughout the assess/plan/do/
review process.
(i) Assess
A clear analysis of the child or young person's
Assessments will often need to go beyond that
strengths and needs should be undertaken;
which is 'academic' or can be defined in age-
Learning gaps may not always be an indication
related terms.
of a special educational need but identifying
The early help strengths and needs form can
and addressing them is still important. This
be used to identify if there are other factors
assessment should include progress and
impacting on the child or young person's
attainment over time and other information from
development that may need support. Strengths
the school/setting's core systems for monitoring
& Needs and Early Help Tools - Oxfordshire
and tracking such as information on attitudes and
Safeguarding Children Board (oscb.org.uk)
behaviours. Historic information, such as prior
attainment, is important in shaping a picture.
Observation and assessments also need to
monitor the impact of any previous interventions
or actions using comparisons to age-related
expectations and other data sets.
5 6.45 to 6.56 SEND Code of Practice 2015
17
Ordinarily available SEND provision
(ii) Plan
Following on from assessment, if required an
teaching and learning strategies and monitor
individualised support plan should be developed
the provision for additional support needs
with clearly defined actions, goals, timescales and
within the school/setting.
arrangements for review/subsequent assessment.
Supports the child or young person to become
The support plan should be a dynamic document
more involved in their own learning and take
that informs what happens in the classroom. All
ownership of their targets/goals.
school staff working with the child or young person
Helps families to understand how their child or
should use the support plan to guide the teaching
young person will be supported at the school/
and provision for the child or young person.
setting and how they can help them at home.
A robust SEN Support plan:
Provides evidence for funding applications and
Accurately reflects the needs of the child or
referrals to external support services, if required.
young person.
Evidences the graduated response prior to
Enables everyone involved in supporting
a statutory needs assessment request, if
the child or young person to have a clear
appropriate.
understanding of the support that will be put
Includes planning and preparing for transition
in place and why.
where a child or young person moves into
Supports effective information sharing
another phase/class, setting/school. The
(including at key points of transition).
current setting/school should agree with
Informs the staff working with the child or
parents/carers the information to be shared
young person of specific outcomes (targets/
with the new setting/school as part of this
goals) that have been agreed and how these
planning process. (SEND Code of Practice 2015).
will be reached.
Oxfordshire has a comprehensive early years
Evidences the assess, plan, do, review cycle - the
transition pack for practitioners which provides
identification of need, what has been tried so far,
lots of helpful information and templates:
and the impact of any additional support.
www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/business/information-
Allows school/setting staff to plan for
providers/childrens-services-providers/support-
progression, monitor the effectiveness of
early-years-providers/transition-pack
(iii) Do
Continued direct access to high-quality teaching
person's needs are met effectively. They should
is critical, focusing on the adjustments and/or
also ensure that once a plan is in place, it will be
additional provision which enable the child or young
implemented consistently and given time to have
person to continue to access learning through the
effect. This might include checking in with the child
lead professional(s) for that class.
or young person to monitor and make adjustments
In implementing the plan, evidence-based
as required, in collaboration with others.
interventions should be provided if appropriate,
Section 11 offers a range of strategies, adaptations
personalised planning should link any intervention
and personalisation designed to assist schools and
to classroom/setting practice, and the school/
settings with devising the 'do' element of the cycle,
setting should make full use of available resources.
according to needs.
The SENDCO's role is one of expert adviser and of
helping to find solutions to ensure the child or young
18
Ordinarily available SEND provision
(iv) Review
An important part of the cycle is the review of
This could be health visitors, speech and
the impact/effectiveness of the support plan.
language therapists, or specialist advisory
Reviews should be structured and focused and
teachers/support workers, who will be able to
held at least three times a year.
help identify effective strategies, equipment,
As for other parts of the process, collaboration
programmes or other interventions to enable
between the school/setting, parents/carers and
the child to make progress towards the desired
child or young person, as well as other partners
learning and development outcomes. The
if appropriate, is key to an effective review,
decision to involve specialists should be taken
establishing a shared, accurate understanding
with the child or young person's parents.
of the impact of support, intervention,
For early years settings, referrals to the early
adjustments and additional provision.
years SEND team, integrated therapy team
(physiotherapy, occupational therapy, speech
Everyone who is involved in the process
and language therapy) and SENSS physical
should decide together:
disability team should be via the single point
Whether the SEN Support is having a
of request for involvement (SPORFI) with
positive impact
parental consent. Help from support services
Oxfordshire County Council.
Whether the outcomes have been, or are
being, achieved
A school's graduated response should be clearly
and accessibly set out in their SEND Information
Whether new outcomes need to be identified
Report, which must be reviewed and updated
Whether support needs to continue or
annually and published on its website.
different support needs to be tried
Oxfordshire County Council and Oxfordshire
schools have examples and templates to help
This specific review stage does not replace the
gather and record information and work with
need for on-going, formative and responsive
parents/carers to plan outcomes and review
assessment in real-time.
progress for children and young people with SEND.
Where a child or young person continues to make
less than expected progress, despite evidence-
based support and interventions that are matched
to the their area(s) of need, practitioners should
consider involving appropriate specialists.
19
Ordinarily available SEND provision
10) The four broad areas of need⁶
(i) Communication
(ii) Cognition
and Interaction
and Learning
- includes children on the autism spectrum (ASC)
- includes learning difficulties where children and
or with speech, language and communication
young people learn at a slower pace than their
needs (SLCN) and all children and young people
peers even with appropriate support.
who have difficulty in communicating with
others. This could either be because they have
Learning difficulties cover a wide range
difficulty saying what they want, understanding
of needs, including:
what is being said to them, or they do not
understand the social rules of communication.
moderate learning difficulties (MLD)
Children and young people with autism are
severe learning difficulties (SLD), where
likely to have particular difficulties with social
children are likely to need support in all areas
interaction. They may also experience difficulties
of the curriculum and associated difficulties
with language, communication and imagination,
with mobility and communication
which can impact on how they relate to others.
profound and multiple learning difficulties
(PMLD), where children are likely to have severe
and complex learning difficulties as well as a
physical disability or sensory impairment
specific learning difficulties (SpLD) which
affect one or more specific aspects of learning.
This encompasses a range of conditions such
as dyslexia, dyscalculia, and developmental
co-ordination disorder.
6 Please refer to 6.28 to 6.35 of the SEND Code of Practice 2015 for more detail
20
Ordinarily available SEND provision
(iii) Social, Emotional and
(iv) Sensory and/or
Mental Health (SEMH)
Physical
- includes becoming withdrawn or isolated, as
- some children and young people require
well as displaying challenging, disruptive or
special educational provision because they
disturbing behaviour. These behaviours may
have a disability which prevents or hinders
reflect underlying mental health difficulties such
them from making use of the educational
as anxiety or depression, self-harm, substance
facilities generally provided. These difficulties
misuse, eating disorders or physical symptoms
may fluctuate over time.
that are medically unexplained.
Many children and young people with vision
Other children and young people may have
impairment (VI), hearing loss/deafness (HL) or
disorders such as ADHD-HI hyperactive/impulsive
a multi-sensory impairment (MSI) will require
type, ADHD-I inattentive/distractable type or
specialist support and/or equipment to access
ADHD-C combined type or attachment disorder.
their learning, or habilitation support.
Behaviours should be explored as communication
Children and young people with an MSI have a
and could be a result of an unidentified/unmet
combination of permanent vision and hearing
communication and interaction or learning need.
difficulties. Some children and young people
with a physical disability (PD) require additional
ongoing support and equipment to access all
the opportunities available to their peers.
These areas give an overview of the range of
"Build an ongoing, holistic understanding
needs that schools and settings should plan
of your pupils and their needs" so that the
for, however, the profile for every child or
special educational provision made for a
young person will be different and individual
child or young person is always based on an
children or young people can have needs
understanding of their particular strengths
across all these areas and their needs may
and needs and seeks to address any difficulties.
change over time.
It's important to identify difficulties early to
ensure needs are addressed and children or
For instance, speech, language and
communication needs can also be a feature of
young people are supported in these key areas
a number of other areas of SEND, and children
as soon as possible.
with autism may have needs across all areas.
Some learners will have had their needs
Please look at all relevant sections to make
identified at an early age and may already
sure that the support is tailored appropriately.
have received support. For others, needs may
not become apparent until the child enters a
As per the Education Endowment Foundation
group setting or difficulties begin to impact
guidance report Special Educational Needs in
on the child's learning and wellbeing.
Mainstream Schools staff should
21
Ordinarily available SEND provision
11) SEND Support strategies by category of need
This section clarifies the expectations of special educational provision that mainstream
schools and settings can make via SEN Support. Not all settings and schools will make
these arrangements all the time but can reasonably do so when required. For commonly
occurring dificulties, schools need to be mindful of their anticipatory duties.
While all the strategies are considered provision that should be ordinarily available in a
setting or school, the intensity, quantity and frequency that the strategies and provisions are
implemented for a child or young person may well vary within the graduated response.
(i) Communication and Interaction (C&I) needs
Children and young people with speech,
Although no two children or young people with
language and communication needs (SLCN)
autism are the same, individuals may have
cover the whole ability range. They find it more
differences in the following key areas:
difficult to communicate with others.
Interacting - differences in understanding
They may have difficulties with:
social behaviour and the thoughts and feelings
fluency
of others, which impacts on the development
forming sounds, words or sentences
of relationships and friendships.
(expressive language) that impacts upon their
Communication - differences in expressing,
ability to produce spoken or written language
understanding and processing language. Good
understanding language that they hear or read
verbal language skills may mask a deeper level
(receptive language)
of misunderstanding.
understanding, using and/or remembering
Processing information - differences in
words that they want to use
planning, organisation, predicting, managing
transitions and generalising skills.
They may have a combination of these needs.
Emotional regulation - some children or young
Learners on the autism spectrum cover the whole
people will need to be taught specific strategies
ability range. It is called a spectrum condition as it
to help them to manage strong feelings.
affects everyone differently.
Autistic children or young people will often
have a passionate interest in a chosen topic
- this can be a source of reassurance for them.
Sensory processing - differences in perceiving
sensory information. Hypo (low sensitivity) or
hyper (high sensitivity) of touch, sight, hearing,
smell, taste, vestibular inner ear (balance) and
proprioceptive (body awareness) can cause
distress or discomfort.
Children and young people need help to
acquire language skills in order to develop their
thinking as well as their ability to communicate.
22
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Communication and Interaction needs (C&I) strategies
Social Communication and Interaction
Provide opportunities throughout the day
Give support to respond to conflict and
to facilitate joint attention
resolve difficult situations
May I Join You ? - English - You Tube
Use social stories to support the child's
Prioritise responsive interactions by following
understanding of social situations
the child's lead www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/
www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/sites/default/files/file/
sites/default/files/file/information-childcare-
information-childcare-providers-sentoolkit/
providers/Allowingthechildtotakethelead.pdf
socialstories.pdf
Use activities such as copy box to develop
www2.oxfordshire.gov.uk/cms/sites/
and extend shared attention in play
default/files/folders/documents/
oxfordshire.gov.uk/sites/default/files/file/
childreneducationandfamilies/
information-childcare-providers/Copybox.pdf
educationandlearning/
specialeducationalneeds/SocialStories_biting
Provide opportunities to engage in 'cause
pdf
and effect' games to enable understanding
of how things can happen www2.oxfordshire.
Display social rules and explicitly refer to them
gov.uk/cms/sites/default/files/folders/
documents/childreneducationandfamilies/
Provide opportunities to interact with different
informationforchildcareproviders/
peers and adults in a range of contexts for
goodpractice/sentoolkit/Causeandeffect.pdf
example, in various lunchtime clubs
Offer activities that encourage learning through
Explicitly teach about facial expression and
play, e.g. imitating/mirroring activities, 'join in'
body language as a form of communication
activities and songs
Support and scaffold non-structured times,
Reduce social demands to only demands that
including breaks and lunchtimes
the child or young person is able to cope with
Use personal interests to motivate and
Give opportunities for supported play with
develop social learning
peers during both indoor and outdoor
Role play social scenarios, and practice
environments. Explicitly practice turn
social scripts
taking by modelling turn taking language to
support communication development www.
Support group work and clarify what the role
oxfordshire.gov.uk/sites/default/files/file/
of each learner is. Include communication role
information-childcare-providers/Takingturns.
models in the groups
pdf
Consider seating arrangements to support
Use individual or small group work to
both collaboration and independent working
focus on specific communication and
Use visual approaches to support the
interaction skills. www2.oxfordshire.
development of social understanding,
gov.uk/cms/sites/default/files/folders/
for example, social stories, comic strip
documents/childreneducationandfamilies/
conversations
informationforchildcareproviders/
goodpractice/sentoolkit/Smallgrouptimes.pdf
23
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Spoken and Expressive Language
Provide a language rich environment that
When communicating with the child, match
supports and encourages all children to have
the number of words they are saying and
opportunities to express themselves
where appropriate add one more. For example,
the child says 'car' adult responds 'yes blue
Repeat back what the child has said so that
car/big car or fast car' www2.oxfordshire.
they hear a clear model. Avoid correcting the
gov.uk/cms/sites/default/files/folders/
child if the word(s) are mispronounced
documents/childreneducationandfamilies/
Reduce the demands on the child to
informationforchildcareproviders/
communicate verbally by modelling and
goodpractice/sentoolkit/Matchone.pdf
supporting the child to find other ways to share
Create structured opportunities to engage in
their message through non- verbal means such
communication skills, such as asking another
as gesture, signing, visual supports (objects or
child for some fruit at snack time
reference, photographs or symbols). Signing
training videos to support this available from
Involve good peer role models and buddies, e.g.
Oxford Health:
for language modelling and to help the child use
Signing training - video 1 - YouTube
learned skills in the everyday environment
Signing training - video 2 - YouTube
Provide opportunities for guided reading
www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/sites/default/files/file/
to support language development,
early-years-childcare/signingbooklet.pdf
comprehension and inference
Teach children to recognise and use visual
Plan activities to practice language that can be
prompts to engage them in making choices,
predictable, e.g. circle time, news, group time
e.g. objects of reference, photos, symbols
www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/sites/default/files/file/
Give time for the child and young person to find
information-childcare-providers-sentoolkit/
the words they want to say
choices.pdf
Repeat sentences back to either expand
the complexity or length, to add a different
Use descriptive commentary to support
vocabulary word or to model the correct
the child's expressive language skills during
grammar
play www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/sites/default/
files/file/information-childcare-providers/
Comment and give choices to encourage
Descriptivecommentary.pdf
talking. Ask questions that are open-ended
24
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Understanding and Processing
Help to make the day as predictable as possible
Signing training - video 1 - YouTube
by using consistent routines/structure language
Signing training - video 2 - YouTube
and expectations www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/
sites/default/files/file/information-childcare-
www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/sites/default/files/file/
providers/visualtimetable.pdf
early-years-childcare/signingbooklet.pdf
www2.oxfordshire.gov.uk/cms/sites/
Support oral information visually, e.g. pictures,
default/files/folders/documents/
symbols, gestures, lists, video clips
childreneducationandfamilies/
Reduce and chunk language to avoid
informationforchildcareproviders/
information overload
goodpractice/sentoolkit/Sequencing.pdf
Pre-teach and reinforce new vocabulary when
Provide instructions one step at a time and
new concepts or units of work are introduced
check or observe that the child has understood
Support predictability, transitions and changes
Allow time for a child to process and respond,
to routines with visual timetables and a 'now
which could be for up to 10 seconds. Slow
and next' approach
down your response to encourage them to do
the same
Explicitly explain non-routine events and
changes to the usual
Modify the language that adults use; reduce,
slow down, give take up time
Check understanding by asking open questions
or by seeking feedback
Use descriptive commentary to support
a child's understanding of language and
Use supports such as task plans, sequence
extend their play www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/
boards, word-banks, glossaries to alleviate
sites/default/files/file/information-childcare-
load on auditory memory and organisation of
providers/Descriptivecommentary.pdf
information
Explain changes to events or routines and
Avoid the use of sarcasm and idioms
support with visual prompts
Consider the use of non-literal language
Use signing to support children's receptive
with care
language development. There are two training
videos to support this available from Oxford
Health
25
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Attention and Listening Skills
Use the child's name to focus attention
Use visual prompts to promote 'good sitting',
individually before giving whole or small group
'good looking' and 'good listening'
instructions
Reduce distractions during active listening
Follow the child's lead and interests
times
www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/sites/default/files/file/
information-childcare-providers-sentoolkit/
Ask the child or young person where they need
talkingtogether.pdf
to sit to help them listen and do their work
Modify the environment to support any sensory
Use specific praise and feedback to encourage
differences; e.g. ear defenders, and where
further listening skills
possible avoid glare and harsh lighting, provide
Provide clear expectations so a child and
a quiet area for the child to withdraw to
young person knows why they need to listen
Consider the best seating for the child, e.g.
and for how long. Consider the use of timers
where they can see and hear in whole class
and group activities or where the sensory
demands are lowest
26
Ordinarily available SEND provision
(ii) Cognition and Learning (C&L)
Children and young people with learning
Dyslexia
difficulties will learn at a slower pace than their
Dyslexia is a learning difficulty that primarily
peers, even with appropriate adaptations. Some
affects the skills involved in accurate and fluent
children or young people will have general
word reading and spelling. Characteristic features
difficulties with cognition and learning while
of dyslexia are difficulties in phonological
others may only have difficulties in specific areas.
awareness, verbal memory and verbal processing
Difficulties with literacy are unlikely to be fully
speed. Dyslexia occurs across the range of
observable until a child or young person begins
intellectual abilities. It is best thought of as a
to engage with print and starts to become a
continuum, not a distinct category, and there are
reader. However, skills around sequencing,
no clear cut-off points.
working memory, auditory processing and visual
discrimination are needed for literacy and if these
Maths difficulties
are delayed for any reason, then learning to read
and write may be more difficult. Poor language
Mathematics difficulties are best thought of as a
skills also impact on a child or young person's
continuum, not a distinct category, and they have
ability to learn to read and comprehend or to
many causal factors.
acquire mathematical knowledge.
Dyscalculia falls at one end of the spectrum and
will be distinguishable from other maths issues
due to the severity of difficulties with number
sense, including subitising, symbolic and non-
symbolic magnitude comparison and ordering.
It can occur singly but often co-occurs with other
specific learning difficulties, mathematics anxiety
and medical conditions. (Definition adopted by
the British Dyslexia Association 2019)
There are a number of reasons why an individual
may have difficulty with maths. The range of
contributing factors include some which affect
learning more generally such as meta-cognition,
language and working memory, and some factors
which are specific to maths such as understanding
number/quantity, understanding mathematical
concepts and learning mathematical procedures
and facts.
27
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Cognition and Learning (C&L) strategies
Literacy difficulties
Offer regular opportunities to share books
Explore eBooks from Oxford Owls, Kindle,
with adults with a focus on enjoyment as well
Libby the library reading app and electronic
as teaching
versions of textbooks
Use audio books for readers who struggle to
Use of specific ICT programmes to support
read texts and where possible track the story
reading comprehension or enhance recording
in the book alongside
and presentation of work, e.g. Clicker and
symbol software and inspiration and Read
Use whole word reading approach alongside
and Write
phonics if appropriate, especially when
children are not making progress with a
Encourage the development of touch typing
phonics approach
from as early as 8 years old. Use free websites
such as Typing Club, Kidztype and BBC Dance
Read the Oxfordshire literacy difficulties
Mat Typing
guidance which has a list of many strategies
to address different literacy problems
Use word prediction to help learners to
focus on the writing task rather than worry
Use strategies to support independent writing,
about making spelling mistakes such as text
e.g. writing frames, sequencing, cue cards,
suggestion in Windows, autocorrect and MS
highlighting, sentence starters, story boards,
Editor when using Word, Smart Compose and
task checklists
substitutions in Google Docs
Gain ideas through multiple choice, mind maps,
Use free dictation (speech to text) in Windows
cloze procedure, drawing, paired writing
and Chromebooks
Have a range of writing supports available
Consider access arrangements for assessments
on the child's table not just on the wall or
and embed these into the normal way of
whiteboard, e.g. phonics and word mats,
working
word banks, personal dictionaries, and
common spellings
Use individual and small group work to prepare
the child for the learning that will take place
Use ICT to support personalised learning
in a later whole class activity and to teach
and reinforcement of whole class learning,
particular skills
e.g. speech to text software, predictive text
software, lesson presentation available on
Teach key vocabulary linked to a subject
student's laptop
in a small group activity
Use read aloud software or reading pens
Encourage pupil to verbalise, share and
to read aloud words and sentences e.g.
develop ideas prior to writing with a peer
'Select-to-Speak' on Chromebooks
or an adult
Consider changing font to a dyslexia friendly
Provide more time to complete tasks
font, e.g. OpenDyslexic for Chrome and
Dyslexie for Windows
28
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Maths difficulties
Use assessment to identify gaps in pupils'
Use of specialist resources to support the
knowledge and understanding; target these
development of numeracy, e.g. Numicon,
areas explicitly in class and use small group
number frames and rods, counting and
evidence-based interventions
number lines
Encourage pupils to verbally create a story of
Ensure that pupils develop fluent recall of
the concept to aid understanding
number facts including number bonds and
times tables: games (e.g. pairs, computer
Emphasise the many connections between
programmes), rhymes (e.g. I ate and ate
mathematical facts, procedures, and concepts
until I was sick on the floor, 8 X 8 = 64).
using real life experiences
Precision teaching can be an effective way
Encourage children to explain their answers
of achieving this
using full sentences
Use errorless learning techniques to motivate
Provide time to overlearn number bonds and
and increase enjoyment of tasks
timetables
Begin with questions pupils can complete
Use models, representations (such as number
independently to enable them to experience
lines and graphs) and multi-sensory resources
success
purposefully and appropriately to promote
PDF worksheets can be marked up on screen
understanding
using tools in Adobe and Edge including
Support all topics with manipulatives/real
annotating, drawing on shapes and lines and
objects and ensure a range of activities to
highlighting
support children in making conceptual links
Onscreen manipulatives e.g. clocks, hundred
between topics, e.g. Cuisenaire rods/ Dienes
squares, number lines, number frames etc. can
blocks
be found at The Maths Learning Center
Chemix (free software) will help you to draw
science experiments by displaying scientific
equipment which you drag and drop to build
the picture
29
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Attention, organisation and memory
Allow time to process language and to
Occupational therapy advice Attention-and-
consider responses
Concentration.pdf.docx (live.com)
Use visual timetable or objects of reference to
Give clear, simple instructions and reminders,
help with understanding the structure of the
using appropriate communication supports
session, and for transitions www.oxfordshire.
such as visuals, gestures, writing and objects to
gov.uk/sites/default/files/file/information-
help with understanding and attention
childcare-providers/visualtimetable.pdf
Use engaging teaching and learning strategies,
Consider reasonable expectations in relation to
e.g. change the pace of the lesson/session, use
specific needs, e.g. the time that may be taken
exciting "hooks"/ attention grabbers
to complete a task. Think of the developmental
stage not chronological age
Use peer support or group pupils so that they
can draw on each other's skills and strengths
Use movement and sensory breaks throughout
the day to help the child regulate and promote
Provide activities linked to interests,
focus and attention
experiences and developmental stage
Provide support to manage time limited tasks,
Provide memory aids, e.g. alphabet strips,
e.g. sand timer, egg timer
number squares, key words lists, word banks,
key words with pictures and symbols
Modify the language that adults use; reduce,
slow down, give take up time
Teach memory skills - memory games,
multi-sensory prompts, mind mapping tools,
Play anticipation games, e.g. ready steady go,
barrier games www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/sites/
hide/reveal something from a box, peek a boo
default/files/file/adult-social-care-providers/
developingauditorymemoryskills.pdf
Provide opportunities to develop listening and
attention skills, e.g. listening to sounds in the
Set tasks with clear goals and break down into
environment, discriminating between sounds,
smaller supported steps
action songs
Develop memory and retention of information
Speech and language advice Attention &
through regular review, chunking information,
listening - Children's Integrated Therapies
repetition, and visual supports
(oxfordhealth.nhs.uk)
Provide additional opportunities for repetition,
over-learning, and consolidation of skills at an
appropriate level.
Use a 'little and often' approach
30
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Give opportunities to apply knowledge to a
Clearly label resources with pictures and
new situation
symbols
Questioning techniques - prepare the child
Use the child or young person's name, to cue
or young person for a question, allow waiting
them in, before giving an instruction
time, vary open and closed questions, scaffold
questions (offer choice), blanks levels of
Teach good/active listening skills and reinforce
questioning
through visuals, praise and modelling
Promote attention and on task behaviour
Develop planning and organisation skills
through task sheets, visual supports, task
through work breaks, task sheets, predictable
management boards, checklists
routines, and additional physical movement
breaks or brain breaks throughout the day
Photograph the whiteboard using a tablet and
bring it to your table, this acts as a memory
Consider seating arrangements to minimise
aide and supports focus as attention is kept
distractions, support focus and lessen
on one work area
fatigue, and provide quiet spaces that
consider individual sensory needs of the
Place strong emphasis on meta-cognitive
child or young person
approaches, e.g. how can you help yourself to
remember this?
Consider equipment and aids, such as bands,
wobble cushions, and fidget toys
Keep tasks short, build in variety and repeat
information in different ways
Assistive technology (AT) can be used to
keep track of tasks, give reminders, support
Pre/post teaching of vocabulary, skills and
organisation and schedule time limits and
key concepts
breaks
Access to alternative methods of recording,
e.g. mind-mapping, video or audio recording,
posters, dictation, use of ICT
Use voice notes available in laptops / iPads
and Dictaphones, to record ideas and
sequence thoughts
31
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Problem solving
Play alongside, scaffold and model new
Support development of perception and
ways of playing and learning. Talk aloud in
reasoning skills through a variety of play
simple sentences to model your thinking and
activities, e.g. cause and effect toys - ball
problem solving in play
runs, switch toys, www2.oxfordshire.
gov.uk/cms/sites/default/files/folders/
Use exploratory play to support development
documents/childreneducationandfamilies/
of problem solving skills
informationforchildcareproviders/
Boxes of toys and equipment should be
goodpractice/sentoolkit/Causeandeffect.pdf
labelled with words and pictures depicting the
messy play and exploring objects/activities,
content
filling and emptying activities, relational play
and building, matching, selecting and naming
Break down skills and activities into smaller
games, sorting activities www.oxfordshire.gov.
achievable steps
uk/sites/default/files/file/adult-social-care-
Use backward chaining to teach the skills
providers/matchingandsorting.pdf
to complete the task with increasing
Use photos to help the child link past and
complexity and decreased support
present - useful for predicting, making choices,
in reverse order www2.oxfordshire.
sequencing
gov.uk/cms/sites/default/files/folders/
documents/childreneducationandfamilies/
Develop problem solving by asking 'What do
informationforchildcareproviders/goodpractice/
you know about problems like this?' or 'What
sentoolkit/Backwardchaining.pdf
ways of solving them have you used before?'
Encourage curiosity, energy and enthusiasm.
Use THUNKs (icebreakers/questions that make
Support development of behaviours children
children think and have no clear answer)
use in order to learn. Development Matters -
Develop problem solving skills by modelling
GOV.UK (www.gov.uk) and/or Characteristics of
them, by thinking loud, using open ended
Effective Learning - Birth To 5 Matters
questions, and celebrating and demonstrating
what mistakes can tell us
Support understanding of sequencing through
play activities - inset puzzles and large peg
Break down tasks into small steps - model
boards, sequencing www2.oxfordshire.
and scaffold them. Encourage children to
gov.uk/cms/sites/default/files/folders/
order pictures of steps to assess and reinforce
documents/childreneducationandfamilies/
understanding
informationforchildcareproviders/
Explore a range of different concrete objects/
goodpractice/sentoolkit/Sequencing.pdf
materials/pictures/texts to encourage
understanding of similarities, differences,
pattern and change
Use methods that develop cognitive function,
e.g. comparison, categorisation, metacognition
O
32
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Play
Follow young children's interests, e.g. go to
Provide toys and objects that are easily
activities that are already engaging the child
handled, have a range of different properties
and look for ways of extending learning there
and range in shape, size, texture, colour and
rather than taking the child away.
sound to support development of visual
Have rich play experiences together - support
perception, discrimination and classification
children to follow their interests and explore
skills www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/sites/default/
what fascinates them.
files/file/adult-social-care-providers/
developingvisualperceptualskills.pdf
Help them to notice details
www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/sites/default/
Introduce small variations to maintain
files/file/adult-social-care-providers/
interest or attention
visualperceptualskillsandstrategiestohelp.pdf
Follow their lead and value their lines of enquiry
Provide plenty of mark making, drawing and
Be a safe, secure and useful play partner
pre-writing activities to develop fine and finer
motor skills
Use descriptive commentary to give language
to the child's play www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/
Teach playground games
sites/default/files/file/information-childcare-
providers/Descriptivecommentary.pdf
Provide structured interactive play
opportunities
Provide developmentally appropriate
motivating toys, experiences and activities to
Deliver circle times and group games with a
develop early object use through exploring
social skills focus (communicating, listening,
objects and symbolic representation 'using'
recognising and expressing emotions)
items even if not for the intended purpose, i.e. a
banana for a phone Promoting high quality play
Focus on a social skill for the week, and
Oxfordshire County Council
recognise this as part of house points or
reward system
Use a copy box to develop and extend play
www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/sites/default/files/file/
Use videos to explore social communication
information-childcare-providers/Copybox.pdf
Teach recognising and naming emotions, and
and imitation skills through role play and small
strategies to remain emotionally regulated
world play
There are strong links between physical
Ensure children and young people know each
other's and adults' names
development and cognitive development.
Young children need to be able to engage in lots
Structured teaching of specific social skills
of physical activity, e.g. balancing, throwing,
within a small group, e.g. social stories,
catching, climbing. Learning opportunities
evidence-based interventions, role play
should be planned to be active and take place
outside as well as inside
Use play-based activities as required (stage
rather than age) to support the development of
Practice turn taking through simple activities,
cognition and learning skills e.g. engagement,
ball runs, pushing a train round a track, switch
matching, cause and effect, sequencing,
toys etc www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/sites/default/
problem solving, language concepts
files/file/information-childcare-providers/
Takingturns.pdf
33
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Engagement and independence skills
Consider how the child's key person will be
Ensure resources are accessible - work banks,
an enabler to help him/her to access learning
sound mats, manipulatives, number lines/tracks
opportunities, other adults, peers and the
Use scaffolded teaching
environment
Teach independence skills through
Sit the child where they can best see and hear
modelling, visual supports and problem-
the adult in whole and small group activities
solving techniques, and check understanding
Consider setting layout with areas of calm,
as often as possible
minimal distractions
Backward chaining (breaking down the
Set up predictable daily routines and structures
steps of a self-help skill and teaching them in
Use visual prompts to engage the child in
reverse order)
making choices, e.g. photos, symbols, objects
Clear and specific positive labelled praise
Use props and visual aids when giving
and feedback - praising efforts, approaches,
information, telling stories etc
application of skills rather than outcomes
Keep expectations clear and consistent
Promotion of a growth mindset
Avoid overloading the child with too many tasks
Linking topics to child or young person's
and instructions at once. Match instructions to
interests to foster enthusiasm, confidence
the developmental stage of the child
and embed learning
Make sure learning opportunities and
Spend time building supportive relationships
expectations are challenging enough to be
to ensure children are confident to participate
interesting but not so far out of the child's
Adapted curriculum: consider the resources
reach that they may become frustrated/or
needed, use different assessment tools, use
experience failure
different recording methods, consider groupings
Help the child to feel secure and happy through
and seating arrangements, room layout
your actions, positive messages and praise
Plan multi-sensory teaching opportunities
Allow the child to lead - OWL (observe, wait,
taking account of differing strengths and
interests
listen) www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/sites/default/
files/file/information-childcare-providers-
Access to alternative methods of recording
sentoolkit/talkingtogether.pdf and follow their
such as mind-mapping, video or audio
lead www.oxfordshire.gov.uk/sites/default/
recording, posters, dictation
files/file/information-childcare-providers/
Use IT to support access to learning
Allowingthechildtotakethelead.pdf
Observe the child or young person, reflect and
consider questions such as 'How can I change
the learning activity to stimulate X's curiosity?'
or 'What can I change about this experience to
encourage X to persist?'
34
Ordinarily available SEND provision
(iii) Social, Emotional and Mental Health Difficulties (SEMH)
All young children need to learn how to make
It must be recognised that behaviour is a way
friends and interact with others. It is expected
of communicating
they will develop these skills gradually through
experience and with caring adult support.
Children or young people can develop social,
emotional needs or mental health difficulties for
However, children or young people who have
emerging difficulties in this area may find it
many reasons.
significantly harder to:
Sometimes these are related to:
make and maintain appropriate and healthy
Attachment disorder
relationships
Adverse childhood experiences (ACES)
regulate their emotions
Autism
communicate their emotions
A medically unexplained condition
manage transitions
A response to an unmet need, e.g. a child who
experience a positive sense of self
has difficulty with communicating thoughts
and ideas may find inappropriate ways to
Children or young people may experience a wide
express him/herself
range of social and emotional difficulties and
mental health needs which manifest themselves in
Other learning needs, either as part of a
many ways.
condition or disorder, e.g. Attention deficit
hyperactive disorder (ADHD-HI hyperactive/
These may include becoming withdrawn, isolated,
impulsive type, ADHD-I inattentive/distractable
distressed, behaving in ways that could cause
type or ADHD-C combined type) This is rarely
harm to themselves and others and difficulty
able to be clearly identified in the early years
following routines and instructions. These
although there may be indicators of difficulties
distressed behaviours may be persistent and may
in this area
indicate social, emotional, mental health needs.
Sensory processing difficulties
A small number of children will have social,
emotional and mental health needs identified
at a very young age. For many children or young
people, needs may go unrecognised until they
reach a group setting and are exposed to the
multiple demands of a bigger peer group in a
highly interactive environment.
35
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Social, Emotional and Mental
Health strategies
The early years SEND toolkit (Social, Emotional and
Mental Health strategies section) contains ideas for
activities, strategies and resources.
Emotional regulation
Consider what the child or young person's
Adapt the environment if they are overwhelmed
behaviour is communicating. Planning matched
by a busy and varied environment with lots of
to type of need, and presenting behaviours and
choice and sensory input
triggers are explored
Use quiet areas for calm down time. Ensure
Make sure the key person is available as they
there is a safe space for to regulate with
arrive to welcome them and help them to
reduced stimulus
settle in and say goodbye to parent/carer
Relationship with the key person in a childcare
Ensure the environment offers support with
setting Anna Freud
transitions which are often key triggers times
Acknowledge emotions in non verbal and verbal
Supporting adults should be aware of and
ways to support their developing understanding
monitor their own regulation and swap with
of feelings Emotions - Help for early years
other staff members when needed Early years
providers - GOV.UK (education.gov.uk)
practitioner wellbeing support - Help for early
years providers - GOV.UK (education.gov.uk)
Build in opportunities to develop emotional
literacy, e.g. through stories, role play, play with
Create minimal changes of routine, familiar key
adults and environment
puppets etc
Consider any sensory differences that are
Look at previously successful strategies to
causing unusual or challenging behaviours
support independent learning skills
Sensory differences - a guide for all audiences
Staff training in de-escalation strategies and
(autism.org.uk)
positive intervention
Arrange for activities to be available and
Use of specific attachment and trauma-
planned into the day to de-escalate heightened
informed strategies as appropriate to need
levels of arousal, anxiety
Use of co-regulation techniques to support
Build in sensory or regulatory breaks
self-regulation
Talk with families the things that generally help
Enhanced pastoral support: regular
their child or young person to regulate
opportunities for check in time with a trusted
member of staff through the day/week to
discuss what is working well and access
support as required
36
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Positive mental health and wellbeing
Consider what the child or young person's
Ensure policy and practice promote whole
behaviour is communicating
setting approaches to wellbeing and resilience.
Develop a whole-setting approach to
Work closely with the family to better
emotional and physical wellbeing Early Years
understand the child's home situation, e.g.
toolkit - Promoting wellbeing | Oxfordshire
for adopted children see - Realistic Positivity:
County Council
understanding the additional needs of
children placed for adoption, and supporting
Consider how you support self esteem
families when needs are unexpected.
development www2.oxfordshire.gov.
Realistic positivity (ncb.org.uk)
uk/cms/sites/default/files/folders/
documents/childreneducationandfamilies/
Ensure staff are aware of the impact
informationforchildcareproviders/goodpractice/
adverse childhood experiences can have
sentoolkit/Ignoringanddistracting.pdf
ACEs (acesonlinelearning.com)
Flexible groupings to develop a sense of
Observe, notice and respond to a child's
belonging, self-esteem, emotional literacy,
level of wellbeing using the Leuven Scales
resilience, self-awareness
of Well Being and Involvement. Oxfordshire
Developmental Journal (ODJ) or The Leuven
Provide opportunities to develop
Scale - Emotionally Healthy Schools
organisational skills and independence
Develop emotional literacy through explicit
teaching of emotional vocabulary and
discussion of emotions at an appropriate time,
e.g. Zones of Regulation
Social skills
Use individual or small social communication
Create social stories to support with social
group work to support personal learning
communication differences to learn social rules
outcomes and build self-confidence, e.g.
socialstories (oxfordshire.gov.uk)
friendship, social skills or nurture groups The
Six Principles of Nurture - NurtureUK, Spirals,
Direct teaching of active listening strategies
Talkabout, Socially Speaking
Opportunities for taking responsibility,
Help children develop relationship
opportunities to take on a role outside current
skills www2.oxfordshire.gov.uk/cms/
expertise
sites/default/files/folders/documents/
Provide oopportunities for social and
childreneducationandfamilies/
emotional development, e.g. social skills,
informationforchildcareproviders/
buddy systems, circle time, circle of friends)
goodpractice/sentoolkit/
Helpingchildrenlearnhowtoproblemsolve.pdf
37
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Anxiety (attendance) including EBSA
Consider where the child feels calm, safe and
Child and young person's voice is key
comfortable for particular activities
Pre-warn changes in routine and staffing
Ensure consistent key person/s offering a
Provide support in unstructured times, e.g.
strong relationship sensitive to the child or
with clubs and adult-led activities
young person's needs
Provide calm, quiet spaces during the day
Use areas of special interest to engage in
motivational learning
Discuss managing worries with the class
Keep a close working relationship with parents/
Provide whole class sessions on relaxation
carers so that everyone understands and is
techniques
listened to, and is supportive of the child and
Be mindful of friendship difficulties and act to
young person
address concerns
Provide opportunities to explore the
Regularly check ins throughout the day
development of close relationships, enabling
the growth of self-assurance and promoting a
Explore if there are learning or sensory
differences to be addressed
sense of belonging
Support periods of transition and other key
trigger times
Positive behaviour support
Aim for consistent daily routines so children
Have a behaviour policy adopted by all staff
know what to expect and what is coming next
(and shared with parents) that is appropriate
for all
Don't let the routine become so rigid that you
can't make changes to meet specific needs
Bear in mind 'stage not age' it is likely that the
Consider whether some children might need
difficulties the child is experiencing will relate
more regular outdoor experiences, e.g. children
to an earlier phase of development than their
who are more active, more physical and find it
chronological age
hard to sit still for long
Check all staff's expectations of the child's
Use visual timetables and resources such as
behaviour are realistic and appropriate both
to the child's current emotional state and
sand timers and lead in time to prepare for
changes of routine or activity, e.g. two minute/
developmental stage not age
one minute warning supported by visuals
Recognise all behaviour is communication.
Use praise for being ('what a lovely smile')
Consider why the behaviour is happening as
and praise for doing ('thank you for tidying
opposed to trying to tackle the behaviour
up the puzzles; that was really helpful') Giving
itself. The iceberg model can help explore and
Effective Praise: (oxfordshire.gov.uk)
unpick what's going on Behaviouriceberg.pdf
(oxfordshire.gov.uk)
Use suitable assessment tools to identify
and address any unmet learning needs that
may be underlying behaviours Oxfordshire
Developmental Journal (ODJ)
38
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Draw on relational approaches to have a
See Autism Education Trust for further
culture of self reflection amongst staff whereby
information on effectively supporting children
staff can reflect on their own interactions and
with a diagnosis of autism
responses and consider whether an alternative
Flexibility built into the behaviour policy
response could lead to a different outcome
to accommodate different SEMH needs,
Use trauma informed approaches Microsoft
e.g. adjustments to behaviour and uniform
Word - PACE School.docx (fife.scot)
policies in accordance with the expectations of
Closely observe triggers that may help in
reasonable adjustments set out in the Equality
Act 2010
understanding a child's distress or behaviour
ABCchart.pdf (oxfordshire.gov.uk)
Positive behaviour system in place for less
Complete risk assessments relating to any
structured times of the day and for extra-
health and safety issues Risk Assessment
curricular activities, with planned interventions
Ensure all adults use positive, enabling
Time out opportunities within and outside the
language
classroom which follow procedures agreed
with all, and focus on getting back on track/
Use a fresh start principle to encourage a warm
task completion
welcome to each new session every day
Staff are vigilant to perceived injustice and
Check use of voice, gesture and body language
clearly explain how matters will be addressed
Consistently implement an agreed positive
and resolved
behaviour support plan (sometimes called a
Seating plans and classroom layout adjusted to
positive relationship plan) Positive Behaviour
meet sensory, attention, social and emotional
Support plan
needs, e.g. are they better placed near to the
Ensure enhanced transition planning into
teacher, which peers should they sit with?
school or the next setting is supported and
Interspersing of non-preferred and preferred
implemented
tasks
For children with autism use Oxfordshire's
Use buddies and peer mentors for support and
SCERTs in Action - a framework that supports
modelling
assessment and planning for children with
autism. SCERTS = social communication
emotional regulation transactional support
39
Ordinarily available SEND provision
(iv) Sensory and Physical Needs (S&P)
Physical disability or delay (PD)
Hearing loss/deafness
This section describes children or young people
Many children or young people with a
who have a greater need than most of their
hearing loss/deafness will have their needs
peers for support with their physical needs. This
identified early.
can impact on their learning.
Some younger children may have needs that go
Many children or young people with physical
unrecognised until they reach a group setting
needs require ongoing minor adaptations to the
or are expected to undertake tasks that require
learning environment that would be considered
them to use hearing skills in a different context.
as reasonable adjustments under the Equality
Children or young people may have a temporary
Act 2010.
hearing loss that fluctuates or acquire a hearing
Unmet physical needs may impact on the child or
loss later. This could be caused through illness
young person's ability to learn in the same way
or accident or might be because they have a
and at the same rate as their peers. The child or
progressive condition or a condition that has a
young person may also have linked social and
late onset. The most common cause of temporary
emotional needs.
and fluctuating hearing loss in childhood is
commonly known as glue ear.
Some children or young people with physical
disability or delay will have had their needs
If a child appears to have a hearing difficulty that
identified at an early age, may already have
has not been identified previously, parents should
received support and will need on-going support
be advised to take their child to the GP. If needed,
and interventions from specialist education,
the GP can refer the child to paediatric audiology
health or social care teams. Where children or
for further assessment.
young people have a diagnosed progressive
The confirmation of a diagnosis of a permanent
physical condition, e.g. Duchenne muscular
hearing loss or hearing aids being prescribed
dystrophy, it is important to plan and prepare
for a child will trigger a referral to the SENSS
early for later needs.
deaf and hearing support team (SENSS DHS) if
In some cases, physical disability or delay may not
families consent to this. Teachers of deaf children
become apparent until the child or young person
and young people in SENSS DHS offer specialist
is older, and their needs impact on learning. Other
advice and training on strategies and teaching
children or young people may have a temporary
approaches.
condition such as an injured limb or require post-
operative care and need appropriate support to
access learning.
40
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Multi-sensory impairment (MSI)
A child or young person with a multi-sensory
impairment has a permanent hearing loss
together with a vision impairment that cannot
be corrected by wearing glasses. Some people
also call this condition dual sensory loss or
deafblindness. The numbers of children with
multi-sensory impairment are very small.
Children and young people who have multi-
sensory impairment are usually already known
to one or both the SENSS vision impairment and
SENSS deaf and hearing support teams. Specialist
Vision impairment (VI)
teachers in these teams may refer to the SENSS
MSI team once the dual diagnosis is confirmed.
If a child appears to have undiagnosed difficulties
Vision difficulties range from mild through
to severe. Many children and young people
with their vision or hearing, parent/carers should
be advised to seek advice from the GP.
have their vision corrected by spectacles. A
child or young person should be considered
Whilst some of the statements in the vision
to have a vision difficulty if this is not due to
impairment and deafness strategies may be of
basic refractive errors and cannot be corrected
benefit to a child or young person with multi-
by glasses. Many children and young people
sensory impairment, the needs are specific,
with vision difficulties will have their needs
and guidance from specialist teacher/s should
identified early and will be supported by the
be followed.
SENSS vision impairment (VI) team.
Some children and young people may have needs
that go unrecognised until they are expected to
undertake tasks that require them to use vision
skills in a different context. Some acquire a vision
loss through illness or accident. A vision condition
can impact on other areas, for example a child's
social and emotional development.
If a child appears to have a vision difficulty that
has not been identified previously, parents
should be advised to take their child to an
optician or the GP. The optician or GP can make
a referral to an eye hospital.
Diagnosis of a vision impairment by the eye
hospital will trigger the involvement of the
SENSS vision impairment team who will work
alongside the school to support the child's
access to learning.
41
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Sensory and Physical Needs (S&P) strategies
Physical disability
Organise and adapt your learning environment
Give support for social interactions and
to enable easy and safe movement, and to
building friendships
support as much independent access as
Provide activities for developing fine motor
possible, e.g. declutter, put the child's coat peg/
skills, e.g. threading beads, play dough, cutting
locker at the end
skills, using tools
Consider how the child or young person will
Provide activities for developing gross motor
transfer between activities and move around
skills, e.g. throwing and catching, jumping,
the setting
climbing, riding a tricycle or balance bike
Complete risk assessments including a
Provide a choice board so that the child can
personal emergency evacuation plan (PEEP) for
choose activities that may not be available or
onsite and offsite activities
physically accessible to them and they can be
Plan the support needed for personal care -
adapted
eating and drinking, dressing, going to the toile.
Arrange training for staff to deliver specific
Provide seating to help when changing clothes.
programmes and/or use specific equipment
Give the option to wear clothes that are loose
and for manual handling if needed
fitting
Consider the location of the classroom in
Sit the child where they can best see and hear
advanced planning
the adult in whole and small group activities
using specialist seating if needed
Plan off-site activities carefully to ensure full
and safe participation
Manage the pace of learning to allow additional
time for completing tasks
Explore recording methods as an alternative
to handwritinge.g. use a scribe or computer, or
Break down skills and activities into smaller
voice to text
achievable steps
Teach ICT skills explicitly such as touch typing
Plan for rest breaks during the day if required.
and mouse accuracy
Have a designated quiet area to have physical
rest
Use accessibility options on computers, e.g.
keyboard shortcuts to bypass mouse actions
Allow time for the child to practise skills
Use resources that reduce the need for
Provide equipment or resources to support
manipulation if appropriate
learning, e.g. bigger puzzles, a range of balls
and beanbags, larger mark making tools
Provide individual or small group interventions
to help the child or young person accept and
Provide sensory and kinaesthetic experiences
manage their physical disability and develop a
indoors and out, for example shaving foam or fine
positive self-image
sand to draw in, big painting on vertical surfaces
Have access arrangements in place for
Provide developmentally appropriate toys,
assessments and embed these into the normal
experiences and activities that enable the child
way of working
to learn without feeling over challenged
Follow advice from therapists for
Aim to support the child while encouraging
him/her to do everything that they can for
management and to support the development
themselves
of self-help skills
42
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Vision impairment
Use an environmental checklist to consider
Give clear verbal instructions, descriptions
adaptations such as highlighting steps
and explanations to accompany each learning
Ensure appropriate risk assessments are in
activity
place
Ensure books are accessible (tactile, large-
Encourage the child or young person to wear
print, electronic)
his/her spectacles if prescribed - if possible,
Use real objects and context to support
keep a spare pair handy
understanding
Position the child or young person where he/
Be aware of the child or young person's eye
she can best see the adult in whole class and
condition and the impact it has on learning,
group activities
personal development and daily tasks.
Ensure good lighting and be aware of the
Prepare in advance any adapted lesson
impact of shadows, glare and reflected light.
resources needed
Think about using blinds/curtains and stand-
Make use of accessibility options on computers
alone lights
Have access arrangements in place for
Use a clean whiteboard, a contrasting pen and
assessments and embed these into the normal
well-spaced, clear writing
way of working if required
Read out loud any information written on a
Seek advice and support for mobility,
board
orientation and independence skills from
Adopt multi-sensory teaching approaches
the social and community services vision
Support access to specialist equipment and
impairment team
technology
Plan all off-site activities carefully. Alert site
Consider support needed for personal care -
staff in advance that a child or young person
eating and drinking, dressing.
with vision impairment will be visiting
Allow additional time to complete tasks or
Provide individual intervention to help the
modify the task, e.g. fewer questions
child or young person understand and manage
his/her vision impairment and develop a
Always introduce yourself when working with a
positive self-image
child or young person with vision impairment
Always address a child or young person with
vision impairment by name and use names of
other children or young people around them
rather than using "you"
43
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Deafness (hearing loss)
Consider adaptations to the learning
Manage the pace of learning to allow additional
environment that may be needed
time for completion of tasks and time for clear
Use quiet areas where appropriate
explanation to ensure linguistic understanding
Walls, ceilings and floors may need acoustic
Check the child's understanding of instruction
modifications
and new vocabulary through open comments
with their name at the start, e.g. "John, show
Ensure good lighting
me..."
Sit the child where they can best see and hear
Use peers and buddies who have good
the adult in whole and small group activities
language and communication skills to model
Check you have the child or young person's
and help develop interactions
attention before you start speaking
Give support for social interactions and
The child is likely to use lip-reading to support
building friendships
their listening - make sure they can see your
Help children and young people to better
face and try not to move round the room while
understand deafness and how they can help to
you are talking
include their deaf peer/s
Deliver instructions using simple clear
Ensure that learning targets and strategies are
language
implemented throughout the child's day with
Reinforce spoken language with visual
individual or small group sessions and adult
cues and clues. A multi-sensory approach
support as needed
is vital in phonics sessions when children
Be prepared for fluctuations in hearing levels
are establishing their phoneme-grapheme
that will affect access to learning
correlation and may mis-hear sounds or not
have access to the sounds due to their hearing
Ensure appropriate risk assessments are in
threshold
place
Repeat comments made by others in a group
Think about access to spoken language in large
which the child may have missed or misheard
group situations such as assemblies
Be aware that during outdoor physical
Be aware of large reverberant rooms such
activities it may be harder for the child to hear
as halls, gyms, science labs where it is more
difficult to hear
and follow instructions
Use small group activities in a quiet
Use subtitles and/or give a written transcript
environment to support the child's listening
when showing video clips (do not expect a
and learning
child with hearing loss to take notes at the
same time as watching)
Provide opportunities for the child to hear and
use language in meaningful situations
Provide individual or small group interventions
to help the child or young person accept and
Use individual and small group activities to
manage their hearing loss and develop a
prepare the child for the learning that will take
positive self-image
place in a later whole group activity and to
introduce and consolidate new language and
Have access arrangements in place for
assessments and embed these into the normal
concepts
way of working if required
44
Ordinarily available SEND provision
Sensory
Discuss strengths and challenges with parents/
Provide regular breaks, e.g. Time away from
carers about their child's sensory preferences
sensory overload (quiet, low stimulation),
at home, e.g. sensitive to noise or dressing
including controlling physical elements
issues
like light and sound, managing classroom
Observe the child or young person's day to
activities, and implementing specific
identify key areas of difficulties. Take into
teaching strategies Creating a Calm,
account the environment, the child's sensory
Low Arousal Environment for SEN Pupils
preferences and any triggers you can identify
(inclusiveteach.com)
Provide visual timetables and now and next
Complete an environmental audit Sensory
boards
Audit for Schools and Classrooms (education.
qld.gov.au). Sensory circuits - Sensory Circuits:
Provide the child or young person with
A Sensory Motor Skills Programme for Children
predictability and advanced notice of changes
by Jane Horwood
and support these with writing or visuals
Use proprioceptive activities regularly
Notify them of changes in teacher, classroom
throughout the day www.oxfordhealth.nhs.uk/
and teaching assistants
cit/resources/sensory-strategies/
Provide movement breaks/movement passes
for secondary school age children and young
people (proprioceptive activities) - www.
oxfordhealth.nhs.uk/cit/resources/sensory-
strategies/
45
Ordinarily available SEND provision
12) National guidance
Legislation, statutory guidance and Department
for Education guidance
Children and Families Act 2014
The Special Educational Needs and Disability
Regulations 2014
The SEND Code of Practice: 0 to 25 years
The Department for Education SEND pages
Equality Act 2010
Overarching SEND
The Nasen SEND Gateway is supported by
government and designed to be a 'one stop shop'
or repository of relevant information and support.
Local Resources
Early Years SEN toolkit
Quality First Teaching
Oxfordshire School Inclusion Team website
46
