Department
for Education
Promoting the
education of looked-
after children and
previously looked-
after children
Statutory guidance for local authorities
February 2018
Contents
Summary
4
About this guidance
4
Expiry or review date
4
What legislation does this guidance refer to?
4
Who is this guidance for?
5
Main points
5
The role of the VSH for looked-after children
8
Corporate Parenting and the VSH
9
Supporting looked-after children
11
Giving the child a voice
11
Securing appropriate education
11
Asylum seeking and refugee children
13
School admissions
13
The Personal Education Plan (PEP)
14
PEP content
15
Initiating, developing and reviewing the PEP
16
Pupil premium plus (PP+) for looked-after children
19
Supporting transitions from care
23
Information sharing
24
Role of the Virtual School Head for previously looked-after children
25
Supporting looked-after children and previously looked-after children
27
Working with others
27
Training for those involved in the education of looked-after and previously looked-after
children
29
Mental health
29
School exclusions
31
Special educational needs (SEN)
32
Annex 1
34
Annex 2 - Custody
36
2
Further information
38
Useful resources and external organisations
38
Other relevant departmental advice and statutory guidance
39
Other departmental resources
40
3
Summary
About this guidance
This is statutory guidance from the Department for Education. It is issued under section
7 of the Local Authority Social Services Act 1970. This means that it must be followed
unless there are exceptional circumstances that justify departing from it.
This guidance sets the framework through which local authorities discharge their
statutory duty under 22(3A) of the Children Act 1989 to promote the educational
achievement of looked-after children. That includes those children placed out of
authority. The Children and Families Act 2014 amended section 22 of the Children Act
1989 to require every local authority in England to appoint an officer employed by the
authority, or another authority, to make sure that its duty to promote the educational
achievement of its looked-after children is properly discharged.
This guidance also sets the framework through which local authorities discharge their
statutory duty under 23ZZA of the Children Act 1989 (added by section 4 of the Children
and Social Work Act 2017) to promote the educational achievement of previously looked-
after children. Local authorities are required to appoint an officer employed by the
authority, or another authority, to make sure that its duty to promote their educational
achievement is properly discharged.
For the purpose of this guidance, the officer/s referred to above is hereafter referred to as
the Virtual School Head or VSH.
This guidance replaces Promoting the educational achievement of looked-after children
published in July 2014.
Expiry or review date
This guidance will next be reviewed in 2020 but will only be revised if it is no longer
considered fit for purpose.
What legislation does this guidance refer to?
The Children Act 1989, as amended by the Children and Families Act 2014 and the
Children and Social Work Act 2017.
The Care Planning, Placement and Case Review (England) Regulations 2010, as
amended.
4
Who is this guidance for?
This guidance is for:
Local authority officers (in particular Directors of Children's Services), VSHs, social
workers, local authority post-adoption support teams, officers carrying out a local
authority's function as a school admission authority, Special Educational Needs and
Disability departments, Independent Reviewing Officers (IROs), Personal Advisers,
care leaving services, and Lead Members for Children's Services.
A brief description of these roles can be found in Annex 1.
Main points
Looked-after and previously looked-after children start with the disadvantage of their
pre-care experiences and, often, have special educational needs. VSHs have a key
role to ensure these children have the maximum opportunity to reach their full
educational potential - an important part of why this role was made statutory.
For looked-after children, as part of a local authority's corporate parent role, the VSH
needs to be the educational advocate that parents are for others.
For previously looked-after children, the VSH will be a source of advice and
information to help their parents to advocate for them as effectively as possible.
VSHs are not acting as part of the corporate parent role in these circumstances, but
are there to promote the educational achievement of these children through the
provision of advice and information to relevant parties listed in Previously looked
after-children.
Looked-after children
Local authorities have a duty under the Children Act 1989 to safeguard and promote
the welfare of a child looked after¹ by them. This includes a specific duty to promote
the child's educational achievement, wherever they live or are educated. The
authority must, therefore, give particular attention to the educational implications of
any decision about the welfare of those children.
1 A child who is looked after by a local authority (referred to as a looked-after child) as defined in section 22
of the Children Act 1989 means a child (0-18 years of age) who is subject to a care order (or an interim
care order) or who is accommodated by the local authority.
5
This duty also applies to 'eligible'² children and to those who have been placed for
adoption.
The Children and Families Act 2014 amended the Children Act 1989 to require local
authorities in England to appoint at least one person for the purpose of discharging
the local authority's duty to promote the educational achievement of its looked-after
children, wherever they live or are educated. That person (the VSH) must be an
officer employed by the authority or another local authority in England.
Social workers, VSHs, IROs, school admission officers, and Special Educational
Needs and Disability (SEND) departments should work together to ensure that,
except in an emergency, appropriate education provision for a child is arranged at the
same time as a care placement.
All looked-after children should have a Personal Education Plan (PEP) which is part
of the child's care plan or detention placement plan. The broad areas of information
that must be covered in the PEP are specified in Schedule 1 (paragraph 2) of the
Care Planning, Placement and Case Review (England) Regulations 2010 as
amended. The PEP must include the contact details of the VSH for the authority that
looks after the child.
Previously looked-after children
Local authorities have a duty under section 23ZZA of the Children Act 1989
(inserted by section 4 of the Children and Social Work Act 2017) to promote the
educational achievement of previously looked-after children in their area by
providing information and advice to:
any person that has parental responsibility for the child;
providers of funded early years education, designated teachers for previously
looked-after children in maintained schools and academies; and
any other person the authority considers appropriate for promoting the
educational achievement of relevant children.
Previously looked-after children are those who:
are no longer looked after by a local authority in England and Wales (as
defined by the Children Act 1989 or Part 6 of the Social Services and Well-
2 An 'eligible' child is a child who is looked-after, aged 16 or 17 and has been looked after by a local
authority for a period of 13 weeks or periods amounting in total to 13 weeks, which began after they
reached 14 and ended after they reached 16.
6
being (Wales) Act 2014) because they are the subject of an adoption, special
guardianship or child arrangements order; or
were adopted from 'state care' outside England and Wales. 'State care' is care
provided by a public authority, a religious organisation, or any other
organisation whose sole or main purpose is to benefit society.
The duty applies to children who are in early years provision (secured by the local
authority under section 7(1) of the Childcare Act 2006) and continues throughout the
compulsory years of education where the child is in provision funded in part or in full
by the state.
VSHs are integral to ensuring that local authorities discharge their duty to provide
suitable advice and information for the purpose of promoting the educational
achievement of previously looked-after children. They can also undertake any activity
they consider appropriate where that activity will promote the educational
achievement of such children in their area.
7
The role of the VSH for looked-after children
1.
Parents want their children to have the best start in life and to reach their full
potential. As corporate parents, local authorities should have equally high aspirations for
the children they look after.
2.
As leaders responsible for ensuring that the local authority discharges its duty to
promote the educational achievement of their looked-after children, Directors of
Children's Services and Lead Members for Children's Services should ensure that:
top priority is given to creating a culture of high educational aspirations and that the
authority strives for accelerated progress and age-related attainment or better for
looked-after children;
looked-after children have access to a suitable range of high quality education
placement options and that, when commissioning services for them, the authority
takes account of the duty to promote their educational achievement;
VSHs are in place and that they have the resources, time, training and support they
need to discharge the duty effectively;
VSHs have robust procedures in place to monitor the attendance and educational
progress of the children their authority looks after; and
the authority's Children in Care Council (CiCC) regularly considers the educational
experiences as reported by looked-after children and is able to respond effectively to
any issues.
3.
The VSH should be the lead responsible officer for ensuring that arrangements
are in place to improve the educational experiences and outcomes of the authority's
looked-after children, including those placed out-of-authority.
4.
VSHs should ensure the educational attainment and progress of children looked
after by the local authority are monitored and evaluated as if those children attended a
single school.
5.
The VSH should ensure that there are effective systems in place to:
maintain an up-to-date roll of its looked-after children who are in school or college
settings, and gather information about their education placement, attendance and
educational progress;
ensure sufficient information about a child's mental health, SEN or disability is
available to their education setting so that appropriate support can be provided;
inform head teachers and designated teachers in schools if they have a child on roll
who is looked-after by the VSH's local authority;
8
ensure social workers, designated teachers and schools, carers and IROs understand
their role and responsibilities in initiating, developing, reviewing and updating the
child's PEP and how they help meet the needs identified in that PEP;
ensure up-to-date, effective and high quality PEPs that focus on educational
outcomes, and that all looked-after children, wherever they are placed, have such a
PEP;
avoid drift or delay in providing suitable educational provision, including special
educational provision, and unplanned termination of educational arrangements
through proactive, multi-agency co-operation. Where this requires negotiation with
other authorities this should be completed in a timely manner and with the best
interest of the child as paramount;
ensure the educational achievement of children looked after by the authority is seen
as a priority by everyone who has responsibilities for promoting their welfare; and
report regularly on the attainment, progress and school attendance of looked-after
children through the authority's corporate parenting structures.
Corporate Parenting and the VSH
6.
In local authorities with a strong ethos of corporate parenting, the sense of vision
and responsibility towards looked-after children and care leavers is a priority for everyone
from the Chief Executive to front line staff. The Children and Social Work Act 2017
established seven fundamental needs (collectively known as the corporate parenting
principles) to which the local authority must have regard when they are carrying out
functions in relation to looked-after children and care leavers. VSHs will need to consider
how to apply the seven principles set out below to their role for looked-after children. In
particular, VSHs will want to work with social workers and others in the local authority to
ensure principles e) and f) are central to the authority's ethos, and work with relevant
children.
A) to act in the best interest and promote the physical and mental health and well-
being of children and young people;
B) to encourage children and young people to express their views, wishes and
feelings;
C) to take into account the views, wishes and feelings of children and young people;
D) to help children and young people gain access to, and make the best use of,
services provided by the local authority and its relevant
partners;
9
E) to promote high aspirations and seek to secure the best outcomes for children and
young people;
F) for children and young people to be safe, and for stability in their home lives,
relationships and education or work; and
G) to prepare those children and young people for adulthood and independent living.
10
Supporting looked-after children
Giving the child a voice
7.
The VSH should ensure that there are arrangements in place to:
promote a culture that takes account of the child's views according to age and
understanding, identifying and meeting their educational needs; and
help others, especially IROs, social workers, carers and schools to understand the
importance of listening to and taking account of the child's wishes and feelings about
education and the PEP process, and how the VSH can help facilitate that process.
Securing appropriate education
8.
When a child becomes looked-after, his or her local authority will arrange a
suitable care placement. In doing so, the child's allocated social worker should do
everything possible to minimise disruption to the child's education, whatever the child's
age, and this should involve the VSH. Stability and continuity in education is important at
all stages, but particularly so at key stage 4.³
9.
If it is not possible to maintain the child's existing education placement, the child's
new education placement should be arranged in consultation with the VSH at the same
time as the care placement. The VSH is responsible for supporting social workers to
ensure timely provision of a suitable education placement for looked-after
children. Their views should be given appropriate weight as part of decisions on
placement moves. There should also be appropriate consultation with the VSH in
another local authority where out-of-authority placements are planned and made.
10.
In the case of an emergency placement, the authority that looks after the child
should secure a suitable new education placement within 20 school days.
11.
In arranging a school placement, the child's social worker (working with the VSH
and other local authority staff, where appropriate) should seek a school or other
education setting that is best suited to the child's needs. That could be in a maintained
school, academy or independent school, and those schools could be selective, non-
3 The Care Planning, Placement and Case Review (England) Regulations 2010 - Regulation 10, avoidance
of disruption in education.
11
selective, boarding or day schools. It might also, in some cases be appropriate to place
a child in a special school or alternative provision.
12.
The following principles should apply:
educational provision should mean a full-time place;
schools judged by Ofsted to be 'good' or 'outstanding' should be prioritised when
seeking a place for looked-after children in need of a new school. Unless there are
exceptional evidence-based reasons, looked-after children should never be placed in
a school judged by Ofsted to be 'inadequate'. When consideration is given to schools
judged 'Requiring Improvement', VSHs and social workers should have evidence that
the school is providing high quality support to its vulnerable pupils, and will enable a
looked-after child to make maximum progress before placing them in that school;
the choice of the education setting should be based on what any good parent would
want for their child. It should be based on evidence that the setting can meet the
educational needs of the child and help them make maximum progress;
the child's wishes and feelings should be taken into account, and the suitability of the
education setting tested by arranging an informal visit with the child. Where a looked-
after child would benefit from attending a boarding school, either in the state or
independent sector, VSHs and social workers should be proactive in considering this
option;
the VSH should ensure that social workers, IROs, admission officers for the schools
maintained by the local authority and SEND departments understand and comply with
the requirements in:
The School Admissions Code about the priority admission arrangements for
looked-after children and previously looked-after children⁴ to maintained
schools and academies, including free schools;
Statutory guidance on school exclusion; and
Special educational needs and disability code of practice 0 to 25 years.
VSH should proactively build positive relationships with local education provision
regarding the admission, support and behaviour management of looked-after children.
4 For the purposes of school admissions, looked-after children are children who are looked after by an
English local authority within the meaning of section 22 of Children Act 1989, and previously looked-after
children are those who were looked after by a local authority in England and leave care due to an adoption,
special guardianship or child arrangements order. This does not include children adopted from 'state care'
outside England.
12
Asylum seeking and refugee children
13.
An unaccompanied child looked after by a local authority is entitled to the same
local authority support as any other looked after child: to have a safe and stable
placement; to receive the care that they need to thrive; and the support they need to fulfil
their educational and other outcomes. Some unaccompanied children who have recently
arrived in the country may never have had access to education before.
14.
Appropriate education for unaccompanied children may include a period of time in
a setting where their full educational needs can be assessed and integrated into the PEP.
They may need time to be prepared for and then become used to formal education, and
their initial educational outcomes may include cultural orientation and life skills
appropriate to their age. Virtual School Heads, Independent Reviewing Officers, school
admission officers and Special Educational Needs departments should work together to
ensure that appropriate education provision for the child is arranged at the same time as
a placement.
15.
The local authority should ensure robust procedures are in place to monitor
educational progress. This includes securing a culture of commitment to promoting the
highest possible educational outcomes for unaccompanied children or child victims of
modern slavery. Achieving and implementing the above should be monitored by a senior
manager, such as the VSH, who is responsible for making sure their local authority
promotes the educational achievement of its looked-after and previously looked-after
children.
School admissions
16.
Admissions authorities of all mainstream schools must give the highest priority in
their oversubscription criteria to looked-after and previously looked-after children, as
defined in the School Admission Code⁵. The admission requirements for looked-after
and previously looked-after children are set out in the School Admissions Code. This
Code applies to maintained schools and academies, including free schools⁶.
17.
It is the responsibility of the VSH to ensure that:
admission authorities understand that they cannot refuse to admit a looked after child
on the basis of challenging behaviour or refer a looked after child for action under the
5 See footnote 4.
6 A 'maintained school' means community school, foundation school, voluntary aided school, voluntary
controlled school, community special school, foundation special school or maintained nursery school. The
Code does not apply to special or nursery schools.
13
Fair Access Protocol on the basis of challenging behaviour (See paragraph 3.12 of
the School Admissions Code).
admission authorities understand that looked-after children can be admitted as
'excepted pupils' in relation to the infant class size limit, if they are admitted outside
the normal admission round (see 2.15(b) of the School Admissions Code); and
the local authority, as a corporate parent, does not tolerate drift and delay where
children the authority looks after are without an education placement that is
appropriate to their assessed needs. This includes using their powers of direction in a
timely way rather than delay issuing a direction as a result of protracted negotiation.
18.
The choice of school requires skilled working between relevant people. It should
be based on a discussion between the child's social worker, the child, their carers and, if
appropriate, birth parents. The VSH should be consulted to avoid choosing a school that
is unlikely to meet the child's needs. The carer's level of input in to the choice of school
for the child should be addressed explicitly in the child's permanence plan, which is part
of their wider care plan.
19.
The VSH should provide advice and support to social workers to ensure they
understand the admissions process. If social workers need further information on how
the school admissions process works in relation to looked after children, they should
discuss this with their VSH or someone else who can provide the correct information, e.g.
the local authority's school admissions officer. If the appropriate placement is at a
mainstream academy or maintained school, the corporate parent must apply through the
same process as other parents. They are asked to note that the national closing dates for
applications are: 31 October for secondary schools, and 15 January for primary schools.
The Personal Education Plan (PEP)
20.
All looked-after children must have a care plan, of which the PEP is an integral
part. The PEP (pre-school to age 18) should be initiated as part of the care plan. It is an
evolving record of what needs to happen for looked-after children to enable them to make
at least expected progress and fulfil their potential. The PEP should reflect the
importance of a personalised approach to learning that meets the child's identified
educational needs, raises aspirations and builds life chances. The school, other
professionals and the child's carers should use the PEP to support achieving those
things.
21.
The quality of the PEP is the joint responsibility of the local authority that looks
after the child and the school. Social workers, carers, VSHs, designated teachers and,
as appropriate, other relevant professionals will need to work closely together. All of
those involved in the PEP process at all stages should involve the child (according to
14
understanding and ability) and, where appropriate, the child's parent and/or relevant
family member.
PEP content
22.
The PEP should cover the full range of education and development needs⁷
including:
access to a nursery or other high quality early years provision that is appropriate to
the child's age (e.g. pre-school playgroups) and meets their identified developmental
needs;
on-going catch-up support for those who have fallen behind with school work
(including use of effective intervention strategies);
provision of immediate suitable education where a child is not in school (e.g. because
of temporary or permanent exclusion);
transition support where needed, such as when a child starts attending a new school
or returns to school (e.g. moving from pre-school/ early years to primary school,
primary to secondary school, from secondary school to further education, or following
illness or exclusion) or when a child has a plan for permanence (e.g. placed for
adoption) and may change schools as part of that plan;
school attendance and, where appropriate, behaviour support; and
support needed to help the child realise their short and long-term academic
achievements and aspirations. This includes:
support to achieve expected levels of progress for the relevant national
curriculum key stage, and to complete an appropriate range of approved
qualifications;
careers advice and guidance and financial information about further and higher
education, training and employment. Discussions about longer term goals
should start early and, ideally, well before Year 9 (age 13-14) at school. High
aspirations are crucial to successful planning for the future. They should focus
on the child or young person's strengths and capabilities and the outcomes
they want to achieve; and
out-of-school hours learning activities, study support and leisure interests.
7 Schedule 1 Paragraph 2 of the Care planning, placement and case review (England) regulations 2010
sets out the high-level components required in a PEP. This guidance builds on this.
15
Initiating, developing and reviewing the PEP
23.
Wherever the child is placed, their social worker, supported by the authority's
VSH, should take the lead to:
initiate a PEP even where a looked-after child is without a school place. This includes
meeting with appropriate education providers and the carer;
ensure that where a child is placed in an emergency, the PEP is initiated within 10
working days of their becoming looked-after, wherever they are placed;
ensure, with the support of others, including the VSH, that the PEP contains a
summary of the child's current attainment and progress (including any additional
needs such as SEN and mental health needs);
ensure the PEP is effective and is available for the first statutory review meeting of
the care plan; and
ensure the PEP gives details of who will take the plan forward and specifies
timescales for action and review.
24.
Once requesting the initiation of a PEP, the Virtual School will need to work with
the child's social worker and relevant designated teacher to facilitate its completion and
agree how pupil premium plus (PP+) can most effectively be used to facilitate the child's
educational attainment and progress.
25.
VSHs should have a quality assurance role in relation to PEPs. To be effective
and high quality, a PEP should:
be a 'living', evolving, comprehensive and enduring record of the child's experience,
progress and achievement (academic and otherwise), and inform any discussion
about education during statutory reviews of the child's wider care plan;
be linked to, but not duplicate or conflict with, information in any other plans held by
the child's education setting or responsible authority - e.g. their care plan or
Education, Health and Care Plan;
identify developmental (including any related to attachment and past trauma) and
educational needs (short and longer term) in relation to skills, knowledge, subject
areas and experiences;
say what will happen or is already happening to identify and support any mental
health needs, including detailing any support that is required or ongoing from mental
health specialist support services;
16
include SMART⁸ short-term targets, including progress monitoring of each of the
areas identified against development and educational needs;
include SMART longer-term plans for educational targets and aspirations. These
should, according to age and understanding, typically focus on: public examinations,
further and higher education, managing money and savings, work experience and
career plans and aspirations;
identify actions, with time scales, for specific individuals intended to support the
achievement of agreed targets and use of any additional resources (e.g. the pupil
premium plus) specifically designated to support the attainment of looked-after
children;
include behaviour management strategies agreed between the VSH and school to
help ensure challenging behaviour is managed in the most effective way for that child;
and
highlight access to effective intervention strategies and how this will make/has made
a difference to achievement levels.
26.
Arrangements for the flow of information to develop, review and update the PEP
should be in place to ensure the VSH, designated teacher, carer and, where appropriate,
child and parent have a copy of the latest version of the document.
27.
The VSH and social worker should work together to ensure that monitoring
arrangements are in place so that actions and activities recorded in the PEP are
implemented without delay. This involves working in a joined-up way with the child's
school (usually through the designated teacher) and other relevant people and agencies
(e.g. educational psychologists or the Children and Young People's Mental Health
Service) where necessary.
28.
VSHs should make arrangements for PEPs to be reviewed each school term.
This should include mapping how the pupil premium and any other additional funding has
been used to support the targets set in the PEP. This is to ensure that the story of the
child's educational progress is current and continues to meet the child's educational
needs. It is also to ensure that information from the PEP is available to feed into the next
statutory review of the wider care plan. The nature of these arrangements and who to
involve are for the VSH to decide in partnership with others.
8 SMART means specific, significant, stretching, measurable, meaningful, motivational, agreed,
achievable, action-orientated, realistic, relevant, result-orientated, time bound.
17
The designated teacher role in the PEP
29.
The designated teacher leads on how the PEP is developed and used in school to
make sure the child's progress towards education targets is monitored.
The social worker's role in supporting the PEP
30.
The social worker with responsibility for the child should:
not take significant decisions about a looked-after child's education without reviewing
the PEP in consultation with the child, the child's school, carer, VSH, IRO and, where
appropriate, their parent(s);
alert the IRO to any significant changes to the child's PEP such as the breakdown or
change of an education placement so that the IRO can decide whether a review of the
care plan is required;
work with the child's school or other education setting between the statutory reviews
of their care plan (involving the VSH if necessary) to ensure that up-to-date PEP
information is fed into those reviews, which are chaired by the child's IRO9;
ensure that all relevant information about the child's educational progress and support
needs is up-to-date and evidenced before the statutory review meeting; and
act on any changes required to meet the child's education needs identified by the
IRO.
The IRO's role in supporting the PEP
31.
IROs should ensure that the PEP's effectiveness is scrutinised in sufficient detail
in order to feed in to the statutory review and at other times if necessary. If a child also
has an Education and Health Care (EHC) plan, where possible, the IRO should ensure
review of the care plan, including the PEP, is appropriately linked with the statutory
review of the EHC plan. The VSH should work with the IRO and child's social worker to
help enable this.
32.
The IRO should raise any unresolved concerns about a child's PEP or education
provision with social workers and the VSH.
9 Statutory reviews of care plans take place at a meeting chaired by the IRO. Under Regulation 36 of the
Care, Planning, Placement and Case Review (England) Regulations 2010, the IRO must attend the review
"as far as reasonably practicable". The IRO must chair the meeting when in attendance. The care plan
must be reviewed within 20 working days from the point at which the child becomes looked after, three
months from the first review, six months after the second review and the third and subsequent reviews.
18
Pupil premium plus (PP+) for looked-after children
33.
Looked-after children are one of the groups of pupils that attract PP+ funding. This
is additional funding provided to help improve the attainment of looked-after children and
close the attainment gap between them and their peers. Local authorities receive a PP+
grant allocation based on the number of children looked after for at least one day and
aged 4 to 15 at 31 August, as recorded in the latest looked-after children data return.
34.
VSHs, working with education settings, should implement PP+ arrangements for
all looked-after children, in need of support for whom the authority is responsible, in
accordance with the latest conditions of grant published by the department and any
supplementary departmental advice it issues. VSHs have considerable flexibility in the
use of PP+ funding in order to maximise its impact for individual looked-after children as
well as the whole looked-after cohort. All VSHs should publish a clear policy on their use
of PP+, including how they decide the level and use of top-sliced funding¹⁰
35.
Arrangements for PP+ should be as un-bureaucratic as possible, whilst providing
for strong transparency and accountability. Ofsted's framework for Inspections of Local
Authority Children's Services requires inspectors to ask for the Virtual School Annual
Report. The Virtual School Annual Report should include:
details of how the VSH has managed the PP+ and Early Years Pupil Premium for
looked-after children; and
evidence of how the VSH's spending of the premium has supported the achievement
of the children looked-after by their local authority, including clearly setting out how
top sliced funding has supported this.
36.
Further information is available on virtual-school-heads-responsibilities on pupil
premium.
37.
The PP+ can be used to facilitate a wide range of educational support for looked-
after children. VSH should seek the input of the school's designated teacher and carers
when deciding on how to use PP+ to support a child. It is important that interventions
supported by pupil premium should be evidence-based and in the best interests of the
child.
38.
PP+ funding for previously looked after children is allocated directly to and
managed by their school.
39.
Both VSH and schools manage their PP+ allocation for the benefit of their cohort
of looked after or previously looked after children and according to children's needs. It is
10 The proportion of PP+ funding centrally pooled by the VSH and used to provide support best delivered at
a local authority-wide level - e.g. training on attachment for all designated teachers in the authority area.
19
not is not a personal budget for individual children; however, both VSHs and schools may
choose to allocate an amount of funding to an individual to support their needs.
40.
Below is a summary of positive characteristics of interventions which can be
helpful when considering whether an intervention might be an effective use of PP+ to
support a looked-after child. VSH and designated teachers may also find it helpful to
refer to the Education Endowment Fund Tool Kit.
20
Getting the most from Pupil Premium Plus
Approaches that are:
Which emphasise:
Individually tailored to the needs and
Relationship-building, both with
strengths of each pupil
appropriate adults and with peers
Consistent (based on agreed core
An emotionally-intelligent approach to
principles and components) but also
the setting of clear behaviour
flexible and responsive
boundaries
Based on evidence of what works
Increasing pupil's understanding of
Focussed on clear short-term goals
their own emotions and identity
which give opportunities for pupils to
Positive reinforcement
experience success
Building self-esteem
Include regular, high quality feedback
Relevance to the learner: relate to
from teaching staff
pupil's interests where possible; make
Engage parents/carers in the
it matter to them
agreement and evaluation of
A joined-up approach involving social
arrangements for education support
worker/carer/VSH and other relevant
(e.g. via the PEP)
professionals
Supporting pupil transition (e.g.
Strong and visionary leadership on the
primary-secondary/KS3-4)
part of both of the pupil's head
Raising aspirations through access to
teachers
high-quality educational experiences
A child centred approach to
Promote the young person's
assessment for learning
awareness and understanding of their
own thought process (metacognition)
and help to develop problem-solving
strategies
11 This table was produced by Darren Martindale, Virtual School Head for City of Wolverhampton Council
21
Case Study¹²
A boy in Year 1 who had lots of potential but his behaviours were stopping him from
learning. This was his third school in one year due to placement moves. He had only
been in school part-time and needed constant supervision due to absconding and
dangerous behaviour. His primary school was concerned that they could not meet his
needs, especially as there seemed to be no triggers for his behaviour and he was very
erratic.
The solution: -
Partnership working - school, social worker, foster carers, Virtual School Co-ordinator
and Virtual School Mentor, behaviour support, district inclusion officer, educational
psychologist. The team had regular high quality personal education planning meetings
where advice and guidance was thoroughly explored and robustly implemented. This
team gave a strong sense that everyone was committed to the young person and was
prepared to always go the extra mile to support him.
Voice of the child - the young person was involved in designing his own safe space and
was able to use it when he felt overwhelmed and anxious. Over time he used it less and
less and eventually he volunteered for it to be used as the space for a new school
mascot instead.
How was the pupil premium used - 1 to 1 teaching assistant support; individual and
whole school attachment and trauma training and letterbox in the home.
Aspiration - To support the pupil to regulate his behaviour so that he could increase his
time in school and make the progress in attainment that he was capable of achieving.
Outcome - He is now in school full-time and permanent exclusion has been avoided. He
is a popular member of the class and is making good relationships. He is starting to fill in
the gaps in his education and is engaging in learning at home, something that he would
not have done previously. He is now very much a part of his new foster family and they
have confidence to go out and experience new things together.
12 With thanks to Staffordshire virtual school, this case study is based on a nomination to the Staffordshire
virtual school pupil premium plus awards 2017.
22
Supporting transitions from care
41.
The duty to promote the educational achievement of a looked-after child extends
to looked-after young people aged 16 or 17 preparing to leave care. These are referred
to in the Children Act 1989 as 'eligible children'1
42.
Local authorities should ensure that:
the PEP is maintained as part of the preparation and review of the pathway plan 14
and builds on the young person's educational progress;
each pathway plan review scrutinises the measures being taken to help the child
prepare for when s/he ceases to be looked after by considering:
the young person's progress in education or training; and
how s/he is able to access all the services needed, including SEN provision, to
prepare for training, further or higher education or employment;
links are made with further education (FE) colleges and higher education (HE)
institutions, and care leavers are supported to find establishments that understand
and work to meet the needs of looked-after children and care leavers;
each eligible care leaver knows about the 16-19 Bursary Fund 15. and
each eligible care leaver receives a higher education bursary of £2,000 when going
on to study a recognised HE course, and that arrangements for the payment of the
bursary are agreed by the young person as part of the overall package of support that
a local authority provides to its care leavers. 16
43.
In line with the Children Act 1989 and the corporate parenting principles, young
people transitioning from care should be supported to continue their education and
achieve their aspirations. VSH have an important role in them achieving this. Although
clearly focused on children aged between pre-school and 18, VSHs should work with
care leaving teams to ensure the education of those transitioning from care is supported
at both a strategic and individual level. For those between 16 - 18 years, VSH should
liaise with the young person's Personal Adviser during the initial transition to leaving care
13 Eligible children are looked-after, aged 16 or 17 and have been looked-after by a local authority for a
period of 13 weeks, or periods amounting in total to 13 weeks, which began after they reached 14 and
ended after they reached age 16.
14 The Children Act 1989 requires that a pathway plan is prepared for all eligible children.
15 This is a bursary to help with education related costs for 16 to 19 year-olds who are studying at school
or college (not university) in England or on a training course. More information is available at:
16-19-bursary-fund
16 Section 21 of the Children and Young Persons Act 2008 added to the duties that a local authority owes
to its former relevant children by amending section 23C of the 1989 Children Act.
23
services to ensure the adviser understands the young person's educational goals and
support needs.
44.
VSH expertise can also inform how the local authority supports care leaver
support including what is set out in the Local Offer to care leavers (required once relevant
provisions of Children and Social Work Act 2017 come into force).
45.
Further information on supporting care leavers in their transition to adulthood is
available in Children Act 1989 guidance and regulations volume 3: planning transition to
adulthood for care leavers
Information sharing
46.
The VSH needs to be aware of their duties regarding the sharing of information
under sections 10, 11 and 12 of the Children Act 2004. VSHs should have access to a
secure email account that enables them to exchange information securely with other
VSHs in whose area they have placed children.
47.
Appropriate and specific arrangements for sharing reliable data should be in place
to ensure that the educational needs of looked-after children can be understood and met.
This is particularly important in relation to the tracking and monitoring of attainment data
and notifications of where children, including those placed out-of-authority, are being
educated. The arrangements should set out:
who has access to what information and how the security of data will be ensured;
how children and parents are informed of, and allowed to challenge, information that
is kept about them;
how carers contribute to and receive information;
mechanisms for sharing information between relevant local authority departments and
schools; and
how relevant information about individual children is passed promptly between
authorities, departments and schools when young people move. Relevant information
includes the PEP which, as part of the looked-after child's educational record, should
be transferred with them to the new school.
48.
Where a child is leaving care through adoption, special guardianship or a child
arrangement order, the VSH should discuss with their parents or carers what information
they are content for VSH to share with the child's school or education setting. This will
be of particular importance if the child is moving to a new school on leaving care.
24
Role of the Virtual School Head for previously looked-
after children
49.
The role of the VSH for previously looked-after children is to promote their
educational achievement through the provision of information and advice to their parents,
educators and others who the VSH considers necessary.
50.
VSHs must discharge their duty from the point at which the child becomes eligible
for free early education, which is currently the start of the term following a child's second
birthday, and conclude when s/he has completed the compulsory years of education.
51.
The duty relates to previously looked-after children who are in education in the
area served by the VSH irrespective of where the child lives. This avoids the need for
education settings to work with more than one VSH and prevents cross-border
complications.
52.
VSHs, in conjunction with the Director of Children's Services, should decide the
extent of their offer to parents, early education providers and schools but as a minimum,
the VSH must:
respond to parental requests for advice and information - e.g. advice on school
admissions in their area. Where appropriate, the VSH should sign-post parents to
other services that can offer advice and support;
respond to requests for advice and information from providers of early education,
designated teachers in maintained schools and academies, and providers of
alternative provision in their area in respect of individual children supported by the
local authority. In particular, the VSH should develop/ build on existing good working
relationship with designated teachers for previously looked-after children in their area;
and
make general advice and information available to early years settings and schools to
improve awareness of the vulnerability and needs of previously looked-after children.
This should include promoting good practice on identifying and meeting their needs,
and guidance on effective use of the PP+.
53.
However, it is important to note that the local authority and VSH are no longer the
corporate parent for previously looked-after children and the VSH role in relation to these
children reflects this. VSHs are not expected to monitor the educational progress of
individual children or be held to account for their educational attainment. Any
intervention in the education of a previously looked-after child must be with the
agreement of the person(s) who have parental responsibility for the child. They, like all
parents, are responsible for overseeing their child's progress in education.
54.
VSHs will want to satisfy themselves that the child is eligible for support by asking
the child's parents for evidence of their previously looked-after status. For children
25
adopted outside England and Wales, the child must have been looked after by a public
authority, a religious organisation or other provider of care whose sole purpose is to
benefit society. Where parents are unable to provide clear evidence of their child's
status, VSHs will need to use their discretion. In such circumstance, VSHs should
discuss eligibility with the designated teacher at the child's school to agree a consistent
approach.
What might providing information and advice look like?
Providing advice and information to frequently asked questions online.
Providing advice to individual parents/ carers and schools where they have a query.
Advising schools on how they can support previously looked after children to improve
behaviour to help avoid exclusion becoming necessary.
Advising schools on how to best use Pupil Premium to support previously looked-after
children.
26
Supporting looked-after children and previously
looked-after children
Working with others
55.
The VSH should ensure that there are effective arrangements in place to work
with a range of professionals who will play a role in supporting the education of looked-
after and previously looked-after children.
56.
For looked-after children, this should include:
encouraging and supporting social workers and carers to have high expectations in
helping looked-after children to achieve their full potential in education, from
preschool to post-16 education, employment and training;
building relationships with social workers to promote consultation with the VSH prior
to a looked-after child moving placement;
building relationships with, where the child's school/college has one, the officer
responsible for making links with mental health services, and, in turn, with local
children and young people's mental health specialists (including educational
psychologists), social workers and other partners, and understanding the support
available to looked-after children with mental health issues and how to access it;
helping IROs and social workers understand the importance they need to place on
education as part of care planning;
ensuring that, whenever a child is likely to move schools, there is a timely and
informed discussion about the choice of school that will best meet their needs;
emphasising to schools the SDQs (See Mental Health) importance in helping identify
looked after-children's emotional and mental health needs, enabling them to receive
better educational support. This includes encouraging schools to complete their
element of the SDQ and follow up on the needs identified;
ensuring strong communication with designated teachers to identify looked-after
children who are absent without authorisation, and enable a swift and effective
response to this
ensuring that there is timely communication and effective co-operation with the local
authority's commissioners and, when making out of area placements, with the VSH
17 Children going missing from education can be an indicator of significant safeguarding concerns;
therefore, identification and response where children are at risk of or do go missing from education is
important. Further information on this issue is available in Keeping Children Safe in Education.
27
from other local authorities, particularly in relation to possible education placement
changes, funding for any additional educational support needs, school admissions,
achievement and exclusions;
ensuring, through commissioners, that:
providers of fostering services and residential care have a robust evidence
base that demonstrates they prioritise the educational achievement of looked-
after children and help them to achieve their full potential;
when commissioning education services for a looked-after child from
independent providers, commissioning decisions are based on the quality of
the educational support provided and its ability to meet the needs of each
individual; and
ensuring there are arrangements in place to support children looked after by
the authority who are in custody. More information about looked-after children
in custody is provided in Annex 2.
57.
For previously looked-after children this should include:
encouraging and supporting early education settings and schools to have high
expectations in helping previously looked-after children to achieve their full potential in
education;
establishing a good working relationship with the local authority's post-adoption
support team so that they understand the role of the VSH and can advise adoptive
parents and guardians appropriately;
building relationships with health, education and social care partners and other
partners, such as voluntary sector organisations in their area, so that the VSH and
designated teachers understand the support available to previously looked-after
children (e.g. mental health services), and are able to effectively liaise with service
providers and signpost parents to those services;
where their local authority is part of a Regional Adoption Agency, cooperate with other
VSHs, adoption support teams and other adoption support organisations who are also
part of the Regional Adoption Agency; and
encouraging education settings and professionals to share expertise on what works in
supporting previously looked-after children's education.
28
Training for those involved in the education of looked-after
and previously looked-after children
58.
The VSH should ensure that there are appropriate arrangements in place to meet
the training needs of those responsible for promoting the educational achievement of
looked-after and previously looked-after children. This may include themselves as VSH,
carers, adoptive parents, designated teachers, other school staff, social workers and
IROs.
59.
Such training, among other things, should include information about school
admission arrangements, special educational needs (including speech language and
communication needs), attendance, exclusions; homework, choosing GCSE options,
managing any challenging behaviour in relation to education settings, promoting positive
educational and recreational activities, supporting children to be aspirational for their
future education, training, and employment.
60.
As part of keeping their knowledge and skills current, VSHs should keep up-to-
date and engage with research and emerging good practice. The National Association of
Virtual School Heads (NAVSH) provides a useful network for professional support, peer
challenge and practice sharing.
Mental health
61.
Looked-after children and previously looked-after children are more likely to
experience the challenge of social, emotional and mental health issues 18 than their
peers. For example, they may struggle with executive functioning skills forming
trusting relationships, social skills, managing strong feelings (e.g. shame, sadness,
anxiety and anger), sensory processing difficulties, foetal alcohol syndrome and coping
with transitions and change. This can impact on their behaviour and education. It is key
that VSHs and designated teachers have awareness, training and skills regarding these
children's needs and how to support them, particularly in relation to behaviour
management and mental health. Many schools will have an officer responsible for
making links with mental health services, and, in the December 2017 Transforming
Children and Young People's Mental Health: a Green Paper, we outline plans to
encourage schools to appoint a Designated Senior Lead (DSL) for mental health. Neither
DSL or VSH are expected to be mental health experts; however, they have an important
role in sign-posting designated teachers to appropriate training and specialist services.
18 Social, emotional and mental health is one of the four broad areas of children's SEN identified in Special
Educational Needs and Disability Code of Practice 0 - 25 years (see Paragraph 5.32)
19 The mental processes enabling us to plan, focus attention, remember instructions, and juggle multiple
tasks successfully. (Harvard University Centre on the Developing Child)
29
As part of this the VSH where possible/applicable in conjunction with an officer
responsible for making links with mental health services, should work with designated
teachers to:
ensure that schools are able to identify signs of potential mental health issues and
know how to access further assessment and support where necessary; and
ensure that schools understand the impact that issues such as trauma and
attachment difficulties and other mental health issues can have on looked-after and
previously looked-after children, and are "attachment aware". 20
62.
VSHs, where possible/applicable with the support of an officer responsible for
making links with mental health services, should also consider how to work effectively in
partnership with health agencies to support wellbeing and, in turn, educational
attainment. This could be through use of an educational psychologist, or by exploiting
any single points of contact that have been established within the local children and
young people's mental health service²¹.
63.
It is important to have a means of regularly measuring the emotional and
behavioural difficulties experienced by looked-after and previously looked-after children.
For looked-after children, currently, this is often done through the Strengths and
Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ). The SDQ is a clinically validated brief behavioural
screening questionnaire for use with 4-17 year-olds or 2-4 year-olds. The SDQ can help
social workers and other professionals form a view about a looked-after child's emotional
wellbeing. It exists in three versions: for parents or carers, teachers and a self-evaluation
for children aged 11-17.
64.
The SDQ can help social workers and other professionals form a view about the
emotional wellbeing of a looked-after child. Looked-after children may benefit from the
triangulation of the scores from the carer's SDQ with those of their teacher and, if s/he is
aged 11 to 17, the self-evaluation to better inform the child's health assessment and
PEP. To help enable this, where an SDQ for a child gives cause for concern or is "border
line", VSHs should work with schools to encourage them to complete their element of the
SDQ.
65.
VSH and schools may also wish to use other screening tools. Pages 16 to 18 of
the "Improving mental health support for our children and young people" document linked
below include examples of this.
20 i.e. ensuring that the school understands attachment theory and the impact of attachment disorders on a
child's emotional development and learning, and adopts a whole school approach to identifying and
supporting pupils with attachment difficulties. This includes upskilling of staff and use of appropriate
support resources, such as those developed by Bath Spa University (see Useful resources and external
organisations
21
Mental-health-services-and-schools-link-pilot-evaluation
30
66.
For previously looked-after children, VSHs should signpost schools to appropriate
tools to help them measure this group's emotional and behavioural difficulties.
67.
VSH and designated teachers may find it helpful to refer to the following
documents with respect to supporting looked after and previously looked after children's
mental health.
Mental health and behaviour in schools
Promoting-the-health-and-wellbeing-of-looked-after-children
Improving mental health support for our children and young people
Children's attachment: attachment in children and young people who are adopted
from care, in care or at high risk of going into care
Transforming Children and Young People's Mental Health: a Green Paper
What might supporting looked-after and previously looked-after
children's mental health look like?
Case study 1
The therapeutic offer for children in care in North Tyneside has been enhanced using the
PP+. This includes:-
training staff in the virtual school to deliver Drawing and Talking therapies;
educational Psychologists offering Theraplay and Video Interaction Guidance to both
schools and for carers / adopters; and
funding a counsellor through PP+ who addresses needs identified through
triangulation of the SDQs, which are completed by carers, teachers and young
people.
Case study 2
The Virtual School providing attachment and trauma training, either commissioned from
external providers or delivered in house by staff from the virtual school or educational
psychology service.
School exclusions
68.
The past experiences of looked after and previously looked after children can
impact on their behaviour. It is important remember this when considering how best to
support the child or young person with their learning and the design and application of
31
school's behaviour policies. Local authorities and schools must have regard to the
Department's statutory guidance Exclusions from maintained schools, academies and
pupil referral units in England. In line with that guidance, head teachers should, as far as
possible, avoid excluding any looked-after child. VSH should build relationships with
Governing bodies, head teachers and designated teachers to support this. VSHs should
ensure that carers and social workers know where to seek advice about their role and
responsibilities regarding exclusions.
69.
Where a school has concerns about a looked-after child's behaviour, the VSH
should be informed at the earliest opportunity so they can help the school decide how to
support the child to improve their behaviour and avoid exclusion being necessary. VSHs
should be proactive in building relationships with head teachers, designated teachers,
school's pastoral and behaviour leads, the special educational needs co-ordinator
(SENCO) and carers to enable this.
70.
Where a child is at risk of or has been given a fixed-term or permanent exclusion,
the VSH, working with others, should:
consider what additional assessment and support (such as additional help for the
classroom teacher or one-to-one therapeutic work) needs to be put in place to help
the school address the causes of the child's behaviour and prevent the need for
exclusion. The Department for Education's advice for school staff on mental health
and behaviour in schools may be helpful; and
make any additional arrangements to support the child's on-going education in the
event of an exclusion. Where a child has been permanently excluded, this will include
rapidly securing new educational provision in line with the child's needs and PEP.
71.
Where a school has concerns about the behaviour of a previously looked-after
child which could result in the child being excluded from school, the child's parents or the
school's designated teacher, following discussions with the child's parents, may seek the
advice of the VSH on strategies to support the child to avoid exclusion.
Special educational needs (SEN)
72.
Looked-after children and previously looked-after children are significantly more
likely to have SEN than their peers. Of those with SEN, a significant proportion will have
Education, Health and Care Plans (EHC plans). 22 In these circumstances the VSH
should ensure that:
22 By April 2018 all of those children with statements should have had their education, health and care
needs assessed by their local authority and, where appropriate, been issued with an EHC plan, as required
under Part 3 of the Children and Families Act 2014 Act.
32
the special educational needs and disability (SEND) code of practice 0 to 25 years, as
it relates to looked-after children, is followed;
for looked-after children, that their EHC plan works in harmony with their care plan
and PEP to tell a coherent and comprehensive story of how the child's needs are
being met. Professionals should consider how the statement/EHC plan adds to
information about how education, health and care needs will be met without
unnecessarily duplicating information already in the child's care plan. Equally, the
child's care plan should be fed into the care assessment section of the EHC plan; and
any special educational support provided by schools for looked-after children with
SEN but who do not need an EHC plan, is looked at as part of the child's PEP and
care plan reviews, involving Special Educational Needs Co-ordinators (SENCOs)
where necessary.
73.
Some children may have undiagnosed special needs when they start to be looked
after. As part of the PEP process, there should be robust arrangements in place to
ensure that any undiagnosed SEN are addressed through the SEND framework as soon
as possible.
74.
For previously looked-after children, the SENCO, class teacher, designated
teacher and the specialists should involve parents when considering interventions to
support their child's progress. They should agree the outcomes to be achieved through
SEND support, including a date by which progress will be reviewed. VSHs may be
invited to comment on proposed SEND provision.
75.
Section 19 of the Children's and Families Act 2014 is clear that when supporting
young people with SEN, the authority must have regard to the need to support and help
them to achieve the best possible educational and other outcomes. 23 For children and
young people in or beyond Year 9 (aged 13-14) with EHC plans, local authorities have a
legal duty to include provision to assist in preparing for adulthood in the EHC plan review.
In line with both of these duties and the corporate parenting principles, the VSH should
encourage high aspirations for children, focussing on their strengths and capabilities and
the outcomes they want to achieve.
23 See paragraph 1.1 of the Special Educational Needs and Disability Code of Practice 0 - 25 years.
33
Annex 1
This is a brief summary of the main roles mentioned in this guidance.
Role
Brief description
Director of Children's Services (DCS)
DCSs have professional responsibility for
the leadership and strategic effectiveness
of local authority children's services.
Lead Member for Children's Services
The LMCS is a member of the Council
(LMCS)
Executive and has political responsibility for
the leadership, strategy and effectiveness
of local authority children's services.
Independent Reviewing Officer (IRO)
Every looked-after child must have a
named IRO who is appointed to participate
in case reviews, monitor the local
authority's performance in relation to a
child's case.
School admission authorities
The local authority is the admission
authority for community schools and
voluntary controlled schools. The school
governing body is the admission authority
for foundation and voluntary aided schools,
and the relevant academy trust is admission
authority for academy schools and free
schools.
Special Educational Needs Co-ordinators
The SEN Coordinator (SENCO), in
(SENCO)
collaboration with the head teacher and
governing body, plays an important role in
determining the strategic development of
the SEN policy and provision in the school
in order to raise the achievement of
children with SEN.
Designated teachers
All maintained schools, academies and
Free Schools are required to appoint a
designated teacher to champion the
educational attainment of looked-after and
previously looked-after children, and act as
a source of information and advice about
their needs.
34
Role
Brief description
Designated Senior Lead for Mental Health/
Nearly half of schools and colleges already
officer responsible for making links with
have mental health leads, and nearly two
mental health services
thirds have a member of staff identified to
make links with mental health services.
Going forward, we are incentivising every
school and college to train a Designated
Senior Lead for Mental Health to oversee
their approach to mental health and
wellbeing. NB: this is not a statutory
requirement.
Post-adoption support teams.
They are responsible for assessing post-
adoption support needs of previously
looked-after children. This includes some
children adopted from outside England. 24
Adoption Support Fund (ASF)
ASF provides funding for therapeutic
services to help adoptive families (including
children adopted outside England) and
SGO families achieve a range of positive
outcomes. Funding is secured following a
local authority assessment of the child's
adoption support needs.
Voluntary sector organisations such as
The voluntary sector provides a range of
Adoption Support Agencies and Voluntary
services, including adoption support, to
Adoption Agencies.
adoptive parents and their children. Some
work closely with schools to help raise
awareness and understanding of the needs
of previously looked children.
Regional Adoption Agencies.
They bring together local authorities and
voluntary adoption agencies to develop and
provide services for children and adopters
on a greater scale, and to promote the
development of innovative practice. This
includes adoption support services.
24 This applies to children defined as adopted from overseas as defined under the Adoption and Children
Act 2002.
35
Annex 2 - Custody
76.
If a young person who has previously been accommodated under section 20
(voluntarily accommodated) or section 31 (under a care order) of the 1989 Act is
remanded in custody, they remain looked-after. The local authority continues to have
duty for care planning and review or, depending on the child's age, the local authority
may also have duties to them as a care leaver. Prior to release, the authority which will
be responsible for the child's future care, together with the child's assigned custodial
establishment, should:
make arrangements to ensure that the child's needs have been reassessed to inform
arrangements for their future accommodation and care; and
ensure that the assessment includes up-to-date information about the child's
educational needs so that the PEP can be revised as part of the new care/pathway
plan.
77.
Under section 104(1) of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders
Act 2012 (LASPOA), all children remanded to youth detention accommodation become
looked-after children. During the period of remand, the child will have a detention
placement plan. That plan should include information about:
the arrangements made by staff in the youth detention accommodation for the child's
education and training. This should include the name and address of the educational
or training institution the child was attending immediately prior to detention and details
about the local authority that maintains any EHC plan; and
the name of the VSH responsible for discharging the local authority's duty to promote
the educational achievement of the children looked after by the authority.
78.
Children who offend and receive custodial sentences remain looked-after if they
were under a care order or were accommodated under section 20 immediately prior to
conviction. The authority, therefore, has a continuing responsibility to review their PEP
as part of the care plan, and to ensure the child's access to education and training is
consistent with their statutory entitlements. In these cases, the local authority should:
have procedures in place to know where these young people are placed and how
long they are likely to be held;
have access to information about the child's educational progress;
plan ahead in sufficient time so that a suitable educational or training placement can
be arranged wherever the child will live following release from custody;
work with their Secure Children's Home (SCH), Secure Training Centre (STC) or
Youth Offending Institute (YOI), in partnership with the Youth Offending Team (YOT)
supervising officer, to ensure:
36
that care planning reviews are continued and facilitate access to education while the
young person is detained;
information on a child's education and training needs is passed to the STC/ SCH or
YOI, usually through the most up-to-date PEP, as quickly as possible;
ensure that the learning needs of the individual are being met; and
that there is proper planning to maintain the continuity of education and/or training
experience once the young person is released from custody.
79.
Where a looked-after child is placed in secure accommodation for their own
welfare (section 25 of the 1989 Act), local authorities should liaise directly with the secure
unit to ensure that they meet their statutory responsibilities to promote the educational
achievement of the child.
80.
More detailed information on local authorities responsibilities to looked-after
children in contact with the youth justice system is available in chapter 8 of Children Act
1989 Volume 2: care planning placement and case review statutory guidance.
37
Further information
Useful resources and external organisations
A good practice guide for parents: meeting the needs of adopted and permanently
placed children (Adoption UK)
A good practice guide for schools: understanding and meeting the needs of children
who are looked-after, fostered, adopted or otherwise permanently placed (PAC, 2013)
Become (formerly The Who Cares Trust)
Framework and evaluation schedule: children in need of help and protection and care
leavers and Local Safeguarding Children Boards (Ofsted 2017)
National Association of Virtual School Heads
National Network for the Education of Care Leavers - Higher education activities and
resources for care leavers, children in care and those who support them
The National Children's Bureau
Research
The impact of virtual schools on the educational progress of looked after children
(Ofsted, 2012)
Education Matters in Care: A report by the independent cross-party inquiry into the
educational attainment of looked-after children in England.
Information on attachment awareness for schools - Bath Spa University
The Educational Progress of Looked After Children in England: Linking Care and
Educational Data - Rees Centre
Looked after children: good practice in schools (Ofsted report 2008)
Practice Tools
Education Endowment Foundation (EEF) teaching-learning-toolkit
This provides useful information and evidence on effectiveness of types of support
which can be facilitated by pupil premium funding.
National Consortium for Examination Results (NCER): VSH management information
tool. The NCER NOVA CLA Reports is a new national system to measure the
educational performance and progress of children and young people whilst in care at
38
Key Stages 1, 2 and 4. The system matches social care and educational data from
the 2016 SSDA903 national database and National Pupil Database; and reports on
some of the factors that are shown to make the most difference in improving the
outcomes of children in care. The tool operates across local authority boundaries to
ensure that children placed in one local authority and educated in another are
included in the reporting functionality.
Mental Health
Adoption Support Fund (ASF)
The ASF was established to help pay for essential therapeutic services for adoptive
families as and when they need it. It is available for children up to, and including, the
age of 21 (or 25 with an EHC Plan) who have been adopted from local authority care
in England or adopted from Wales, Scotland, Northern Ireland but living in England.
From 1 April 2016, the Fund became available for intercountry adoptions (once the
placement has been made and the child is in England) and for Special Guardians who
care for children who were looked-after immediately prior to the Special Guardianship
Order.
Children's attachment: attachment in children and young people who are adopted
from care, in care or at high risk of going into care (NICE guideline, 2015)
This guideline covers the identification, assessment and treatment of attachment
difficulties in children and young people up to age 18 who are adopted from care, in
special guardianship, looked after by local authorities in foster homes (including
kinship foster care), residential settings and other accommodation, or on the edge of
care.
Mental health and behaviour in schools guidance (Department for Education, 2016)
Strength and Difficulties Questionnaire
Information for researchers and professionals about SDQs
MindEd
Online training materials on mental health for families and professionals working
Transforming Children and Young People's Mental Health: a Green Paper
A green paper setting out measures to improve mental health support for children and
young people.
Other relevant departmental advice and statutory guidance
Adoption: statutory guidance
39
Boarding Schools: improving outcomes for vulnerable children (guidance)
Careers guidance provision for young people in schools (statutory guidance)
Children Act 1989: care planning, placement and case review (statutory guidance)
Children Act 1989: transition to adulthood for care leavers (statutory guidance)
Directors of children's services: roles and responsibilities (statutory guidance)
Improving looked-after children's attainment in primary schools (guidance)
Improving looked-after children's attainment in secondary schools (guidance)
Independent reviewing officers' handbook (statutory guidance)
Mental health and behaviour in schools (guidance)
Pupil premium: funding and accountability for schools (guidance)
SEND code of practice: 0 to 25 years (statutory guidance)
School admissions code (statutory guidance):
School exclusion (statutory guidance)
Working together to safeguard children (statutory guidance)
Other departmental resources
Academy admission request form for looked-after children
Outcomes for children looked after by local authorities
40
Department
for Education
© Crown copyright 2018
This publication (not including logos) is licensed under the terms of the Open
Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. Where we have identified any
third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright
holders concerned.
To view this licence:
visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3
email
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk
write to
Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London, TW9 4DU
About this publication:
enquiries www.education.gov.uk/contactus
download www.gov.uk/government/publications
Reference: DFE-00053-2018
Follow us on Twitter:
f
Like us on Facebook:
@educationgovuk
facebook.com/educationgovuk
41
