4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
GOV
UK
Ofsted
raising standards
improving lives
Research and analysis
Research review series: English
Updated 15 July 2022
Applies to England
Contents
Introduction
Curriculum and pedagogy
Assessment
Systems at subject and school level
Conclusion
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-reviewseries-english
1/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
OGL
© Crown copyright 2022
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where
otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-
licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London
TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curriculum-
research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-english
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publicatons/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculun-research-reviewseries-engis)
2/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
Introduction
More than any other subject, English - and especially reading - gives pupils
access to the rest of the curriculum and is fundamental to their educational
success. This is why the introduction to the national curriculum says:
'Fluency in the English language is an essential foundation for success in all
subjects'
[footnote 11
But English is so much more than the gateway to success in other
curriculum subjects. Through studying literature, pupils' eyes are opened to
the human experience; they explore meaning and ambiguity as well as the
beauty and power of language. English also has a strong creative and
expressive dimension.
This review explores the research literature relating to English. Its purpose
is to identify factors that can contribute to high-quality curriculums,
pedagogy, assessment and schools' systems for managing the subject. The
purpose of this review is set out more fully in the 'Principles behind Ofsted's
research reviews and subject reports'
[footnote
2]
Aspects of English, particularly how to teach reading, have been the subject
of much debate over many years. In this report, we have:
set out the national context in relation to English
summarised our review of research into factors that can affect the quality
of education in English
considered curriculum progression in English, pedagogy, assessment and
the impact of school leaders' decisions on provision
The review draws on a range of sources, including our 'Education
inspection framework: overview of research' and the 3 phases of our
curriculum research. [footnote 3] However, it does not revisit in depth the
research literature on phonics and on what pedagogical approaches to
teaching phonics are most successful: these have already been
summarised as part of the overview of research.
Our education inspection framework (EIF) and the research underpinning it
are the lenses through which we have considered, framed and presented
the research literature in this review.
We hope that, through this review, we will contribute to improving the quality
of education in English, thereby raising standards in reading, writing and
spoken language for all young people.
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculun-research-review-series-englisfh
3/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
Ambition for all
The requirement for maintained schools and academies to offer a broad and
balanced curriculum is set out in:
the Education Act 2002, [footnote 4] which applies to all maintained schools
the Academies Act 2010, [footnote 5] which applies to academies
This expectation is reflected in the national curriculum and is at the heart of
the EIF. English has been a core subject of the national curriculum since the
Education Reform Act of 1988.
National context
The broad headlines about the performance of pupils in English have
remained constant over many years.
National checks, tests and examinations show girls outperforming boys, and
pupils from disadvantaged backgrounds achieving less well than their
peers. International studies in which England has participated, such as the
Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) and the
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)'s
Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), show a similar
picture.
[footnote 6]
In 2018 and 2019, 74% of children achieved the early learning goal for
writing at the end of the early years foundation stage (EYFS). In the same
years, 77% met the early learning goal for reading. In 2019, 73% of children
met the expected level of development across all the combined early
learning goals for communication, language and literacy, which include
reading and writing.
[footnote 7]
At the end of Year 1, the phonics screening check assesses whether
children can accurately decode a selection of words that include common
grapheme-phoneme correspondences (GPCs): the first step in word
reading. Performance overall has improved substantially since 2011, the
first year of the check - by 24 percentage points. [footnote 8] These figures still
show that around 3 in 10 pupils from disadvantaged backgrounds cannot
decode at the minimum standard required.
[footnote 9]
Since new key stage 1 assessments were introduced in 2016, the
percentage of pupils reaching the expected standard for reading and writing
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-review-series-englisha
4/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
has remained broadly stable for reading, with an upward trend for writing. In
the 2019 key stage 2 national tests, 73% of pupils reached the expected
standard in the reading test. However, put another way, over 1 in 4 pupils
moved to secondary school having not met the expected standard of the
test. This carries implications for their learning both in English and more
widely across the secondary curriculum.
It is concerning that 3 in 10 pupils in 2019 did not gain even a 'standard
pass' in English language at GCSE. [footnote 10] Early entry has also affected
outcomes. Pupils who were entered for English literature in 2018 and then
for English language in 2019 generally achieved lower grades in English
language than pupils who took both subjects in 2019.
[footnote
11]
A recent
study of GCSEs also showed that disadvantaged pupils 'were more likely to
attend schools that enter pupils early and, consequently, a higher-than-
average percentage (7.5%) were entered early in English' [footnote 12] As
well
as potentially impacting on pupils' performance, early entry might limit the
breadth of the English literature curriculum.
Over the last 10 years, the number of pupils studying A-level English has
declined: in 2019, 57,912 pupils chose A-level English, compared with
84,037 in 2010. [footnote 13] The same data shows the decline was more
marked for boys.
Curriculum and pedagogy
Aims of education in English
English is a complex subject that combines the disciplines of English
language and literature. It is beyond the scope of this review to debate the
aims of a curriculum for English. Instead, we discuss the nature of the
curriculum and the pedagogy that could meet the aims of the national
curriculum for English.
The review structure is designed to consider individual national curriculum
aims. It draws on research that outlines the progression in curriculum
content that best enables pupils to meet each of these aims. The review
then discusses what might be the most appropriate pedagogies for learning
that particular content. For example, the review considers the aim of
improving reading comprehension and how comprehension becomes
possible partly through acquiring and deepening vocabulary. Appropriate
pedagogies for learning vocabulary are then discussed. The use of this
structure avoids confusion between curriculum goals and the means of
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
5/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
achieving and nurturing those goals. It also helps reduce repetition when
discussing knowledge of language, such as vocabulary, across each of the
speaking, reading and writing modalities.
The review reflects the advice given by the expert panel on the
government's last review of the national curriculum. The panel argued that
'developmental aspects and basic skills are more crucial for young children
[key stage 1/2], while appropriate understanding of more differentiated
subject knowledge, concepts and skills becomes more important for older
pupils' [footnote 14] Panel members developed a working definition of this
subject knowledge as 'the concepts, facts, processes, language, narratives
and conventions of each subject'
[footnote
15]
The implications of research into expertise bear out the usefulness of a
curriculum structure that places varying emphasis on different curriculum
goals as pupils gain expertise. [footnote 16] However, this review also
considers the ways in which English is a unified subject across all phases of
schooling. There is a separate section on early years, but the insights in the
other sections are generally relevant to pupils in both primary and
secondary schooling. This is because most of the principles discussed are
important at primary and secondary level or are relevant to many pupils in
both phases of schooling. Where it is probable that findings of the review
are more relevant at primary or at secondary level, we refer to 'younger
pupils' or 'older pupils', respectively. We use this wording to be clear that we
do not imply there is a specific age when these findings start to apply.
The importance of foundational knowledge for spoken
language, reading and writing
One distinctive feature of English teaching is that the modalities of
speaking, reading and writing are not only the objects of study but also the
means through which the subject is learned. Teaching activities, or
pedagogies, to improve speaking, reading and writing will necessarily
involve activities that use speaking, reading and writing.
There is a risk that planning for English teaching ends up focusing on using
modalities (pedagogy) at the expense of identifying the foundational
knowledge of language that pupils need for comprehension or
communication in whatever modality they are using. When this happens,
means and ends have become confused. For example, there is a body of
research exploring the benefits of using discussion (dialogic talk) as a
generic pedagogy. [footnote 17] Using such a pedagogy to help pupils learn
any objective across curriculum subjects should not be conflated with the
prior teaching of the structures of language that would allow effective
communication in the first place.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculun-research-review-series-english
6/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
Knowledge of language, which includes linguistic knowledge like vocabulary
and grammar, as well as knowledge of the world for comprehension,
underpins progression in spoken language, reading and writing. This insight
repeatedly emerges from the evidence outlined in this review. The review
will explore the important implications of this insight for curriculum design. It
argues that, when planning a curriculum, teachers and leaders should
prioritise progression in knowledge of language and of its forms, usage,
grammar and vocabulary. This knowledge, of the structures of language,
can then be used by pupils across their spoken language, reading and
writing.
A survey of teachers reported overwhelmingly that if pupils have limited
vocabulary, this affects their progress across a wide range of subjects.
[footnote
18 Eighty per cent of these teachers said it was 'very' or 'extremely'
challenging for pupils with limited vocabulary to read national test papers.
This limited vocabulary, or so called 'word gap', [footnote 19] has been an
area
of interest over decades. A range of research has found that this word gap
exists between pupils from different socio-economic backgrounds and within
different socio-economic groups. [footnote 20] The nature of this word gap is
explored in the section 'The importance of high-quality spoken language.
Pupils' expressive vocabulary (the words that they can use) and receptive
vocabulary (the words that they understand) are important components of
their wider language skills. [footnote 21] There is a positive correlation between
a pupil's vocabulary size and their academic success.
[footnote 22]
Pupils'
vocabulary size can act as a proxy measure for educational attainments and
abilities in English as well as for general knowledge of science, history and
the arts.
[footnote 23]
Importantly, pupils can use the knowledge learned in the context of one
modality to help them in another. For example, they can use vocabulary
learned through reading when they are speaking and writing, both in school
and their wider lives.
There can be a presumption that English is a 'skills-based' subject without
an identifiable body of knowledge, including vocabulary, to be learned.
However, evidence on the foundational importance of different forms of
knowledge, cited throughout this review, challenges this presumption. For
example, a review of research on the role of background knowledge in
reading comprehension suggests that explicitly teaching background
knowledge is foundational to increasing pupils' reading competency. [footnote
24] Furthermore, pupils need to be exposed to background knowledge in a
'specific, explicit and sequenced way' [footnote 25] In this review, we explore
the forms of knowledge that give pupils the capacity to perform skilfully in
spoken language, reading and writing, including the study of literature.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculun-research-review-series-english
7/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
The early English curriculum in schools
Summary
This section will outline findings suggesting that, in the early years and
into key stage 1, teachers need to develop children's spoken language
as well as accurate word reading and spelling. They also need to teach
children fluent letter formation (unjoined handwriting).
Pupils should be taught to read using a systematic synthetic phonics
programme in Reception and this should not be delayed if children are
not already phonologically aware. Teaching phonics also supports the
development of pupils' handwriting and spelling. Schools should identify
early on any children who have not grasped the alphabetic code and
intervene swiftly. Children who master the alphabetic code early on
make better progress than their peers who do not. Good language
development, including vocabulary, has benefits for pupils beyond their
reading.
The importance of high-quality spoken language
At both primary and secondary level, the gap between those who are word-
rich and those who are word-poor correlates with lasting socio-economic
and health inequalities. Children with a language deficit at the age of 5 are 4
times more likely to have reading difficulties when they are adults.
[footnote 26]
Spoken language proficiency also has a positive effect on later economic
well-being, and on happiness and mental health. [footnote 27]
Developing spoken language, including vocabulary, is essential for the
academic progress of all children. This is because broad underpinning
knowledge, such as of vocabulary and syntax, supports later reading
success.
[footnote 28]
Research has also shown the positive impact of
language ability, but particularly vocabulary, on GCSE outcomes in
mathematics, English language and English literature.
[footnote 29]
Developing
spoken language is especially important for those from disadvantaged
backgrounds, who are the most likely to be word-poor.
[footnote 30]
Developing vocabulary explicitly, especially in the early years, is therefore
critically important. Without action to tackle it, the word gap grows.
[footnote 31]
This has been called the 'Matthew effect': that is, the word-rich get richer
and the word-poor get poorer. [footnote 32] If schools work to reduce the word
gap in the early years and key stage 1 well, disadvantaged children can
develop their vocabulary faster.
[footnote
33]
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-reviewseries-englisha
8/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
The components of reading and writing in the early years and key
stage 1
The national curriculum's programmes of study for reading reflect the simple
view of reading.
[footnote 34]
The updated version of Gough and Tunmer's
original model describes reading comprehension as the product of word
recognition and language comprehension.
[footnote 35]
The national
curriculum outlines that:
footnote 36]
"Skilled word reading involves both the speedy working out of the
pronunciation of unfamiliar printed words (decoding) and the speedy
recognition of familiar printed words. Underpinning both is the
understanding that the letters on the page represent the sounds in
spoken words. Good comprehension draws from linguistic knowledge (in
particular of vocabulary and grammar) and on knowledge of the world."
The programmes of study for key stages 1 and 2 are organised to reflect
these 2 aspects of reading - word reading and comprehension. [footnote 37]
The programmes of study for writing distinguish between 'transcription' and
'composition'. This reflects the approach to reading, and sees writing as its
counterpart (with spelling as the counterpart of decoding). Transcription also
includes handwriting.
Once children are fluent in word reading, they are able to focus on
comprehending what they read. [footnote 38] Similarly, fluency in transcription
frees up working memory to focus on composing writing.
Teaching word reading and transcription should begin in Reception, as part
of the teaching of phonics. [footnote 39] This priority continues into key stage 1
and for older pupils who have not mastered the early stages of learning to
read (and write). The Department for Education's early reading framework
provides further guidance.
[footnote 40]
Language comprehension and composition can be developed through a
literature-rich environment,
[footnote
41]
for example through interactions
between adults and children and by listening to, talking about and learning
by heart stories, poems, rhymes and songs.
Starting phonics teaching early
A rigorous review and meta-analysis of research literature on reading by the
National Reading Panel (NRP), from the United States, found it highly
beneficial for phonics teaching to begin on entry to school.
[footnote 42]
According to the NRP analysis, systematic phonics teaching is much more
effective if introduced early on rather than after American first grade at age
6. Daily systematic phonics instruction leads to a faster start in early reading
and spelling.
[footnote 43]
Findings from cognitive neuroscience reinforce the
importance of early phonics teaching. This allows children to develop
efficient word-reading skills. [footnote 44] Children become primed to learn to
read.
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-reviewseries-englisht
9/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
Our overview of research highlighted evidence that showed a systematic
synthetic approach is particularly effective and that children need direct
instruction in phonics. This is especially the case for those from lower socio-
economic status backgrounds and those who are having difficulties reading.
[footnote 45]
Phonics represents a body of knowledge needed for successful
word reading. Synthetic phonics teaches children to decode words: children
look at each grapheme to say each corresponding phoneme in turn, and
then to blend the phonemes to say the whole word. They are taught to
encode (spell) words, by identifying the phonemes in spoken words first and
then writing the graphemes that represent the phonemes.
Young children with well-developed phonemic awareness skills tend to be
successful readers, while children without these skills are not. [footnote 46]
Shanahan defines phonemic awareness as being about 'hearing and
thinking about or manipulating the individual sounds within words'
[footnote 47]
However, phonics teaching in Reception should not be delayed if children
cannot yet distinguish individual phonemes. This is because children's
ability to do this will typically develop as a result of phonics teaching. [footnote
48] Exposing them to letters and the sounds they represent and teaching
them about GPCs in phonics lessons help children to distinguish individual
phonemes and improve their phonemic awareness.
[footnote 49]
Evidence
from the NRP concluded that phonemic awareness instruction had a greater
impact when it was taught with letters rather than without letters.
[footnote 50]
Children who find it difficult to distinguish between phonemes often benefit
from small group or one-to-one teaching to support them to link sounds to
letters.
[footnote 51]
Drawing on these research findings, the Department for Education reading
framework
[footnote 52]
states that: 'To enable children to keep up, they should
be given extra practice, either in a small group or one-to-one, whether or not
a specific reason has been found. The extra practice should:
take place in a quiet place, at a regular time every day so that the
children become familiar with the routine
be a school priority, with maximum efforts made to avoid disruption or
cancellation
be provided by a well-trained adult: teacher or teaching assistant
be consistent with the school's mainstream phonics programme
include activities that secure the important phonic knowledge the children
have not grasped.'
Decodable books
The national curriculum requires that children hear, share and discuss a
wide range of high-quality books. In terms of their own reading, the national
curriculum states that they should practise with decodable books. These are
'books that are consistent with their developing phonic knowledge and that
do not require them to use other strategies to work out words' [footnote 53]
http://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-engish/curiculum-researchreview-series-englisht
10/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
During story time, the books that teachers and parents read to children
develop their language knowledge. These books do not need to be
decodable because the children are not using them to learn to decode.
Research supports giving children daily opportunities to read words that
they can decode, both in isolation and in the books they read.
[footnote 54]
In
using decodable books to practise their reading, children learn to apply their
phonic knowledge to words. If children are required to 'guess' how to read a
word, then this can be a missed opportunity for them to learn and practise
how to spell and read the word and thus reduce the need to guess it in the
future. [footnote 55]
Research on the effectiveness of decodable texts is sparse. However, a
review of research on the influence of decodable texts on reading
achievement found that decodability is a 'critical characteristic' of early
reading text.
[footnote 56]
The research reviewed suggests that decodability
increases the likelihood that children will use a decoding strategy, and may
also improve accuracy. [footnote 57] It seems reasonable to presume that
successful use of decoding is motivating for children.
Pupils who struggle with decoding
Schools need to prioritise teaching the alphabetic code to pupils, of any
age, who are not able to decode accurately or who are otherwise at risk of
not learning to read. [footnote 58] Research investigating the role of phonics in
predicting later reading success has shown that pupils who pass the
phonics screening check by the end of Year 2 are more successful in
reading comprehension at age 12 than those who do not pass the test by
the end of key stage 1. [footnote 59] In primary and secondary schools,
teachers and leaders need to identify quickly those pupils who are finding it
hard to grasp any of the code they have been taught. Intervention is most
effective when it occurs promptly.
Ongoing assessment of all children's phonic knowledge is critical to
identifying pupils who need intervention. They need to be taught the
alphabetic code as effectively and as swiftly as possible so that they do not
fall behind their peers, and so that they have full access to the curriculum
that proficient reading gives them.
Fluency
In the early stages of learning to read, it is critical that children achieve both
accuracy and sufficient speed in decoding (fluency). The national curriculum
says that pupils in Year 1 should be able to read words comprising the Year
1 GPCs 'accurately and speedily'
[footnote 60]
Pupils who can decode
accurately but cannot do so quickly will not progress towards reading
confidently beyond sounding out words in texts. Fluent word reading frees
up children's working memory to focus on comprehension.
[footnote 61]
To
develop fluency, children need repeated practice.
Writing
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
11/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
Writing involves transcription (spelling and handwriting) and composition
(articulating ideas and structuring them in speech, before writing them
down).
[footnote 62]
Pupils need sufficient capacity in their working memory to
plan, compose and review effectively. This requires transcription skills to be
secure.
[footnote 63]
As a result, fluent transcription skills should be a critical
focus for the early years and key stage 1. By the beginning of Year 1, 'not all
pupils will have the spelling and handwriting skills they need to write down
everything that they can compose out loud'. The national curriculum
suggests using dictated sentences in Year 1 to apply and practise spelling.
Working towards written composition
In the earliest stages of writing instruction, it may be effective to teach
composition and transcription separately. For example, when focusing on
composition, pupils can convey their ideas orally. Teachers can model how
text is an important vehicle for recording ideas, thoughts and feelings by
putting pupils' ideas into writing, modelling spelling and punctuation, or
showing how a writer chooses appropriate words and sentence structure to
convey an idea. This allows pupils to focus their attention on composition
through oral activities. Separate teaching activities can be devoted to
transcription. For example, in the early stage of phonics instruction,
practising letter formation or writing simple sentences dictated by the
teacher can support recall of GPCs for spelling.
[footnote 64]
Developing
written composition is considered in more detail in the 'Writing' section of
this review.
Spelling
When young children are taught phonics, they learn the alphabetic code for
spelling (encoding) as well as for reading (decoding). This is why spelling
and decoding have been referred to as 'reversible processes'. [footnote 65]
Reading involves blending the individual sounds of a word to say the whole
word, while spelling requires the writer to segment a whole word into its
individual sounds (phonemes) and to identify what they are.
As well as the skill of segmenting, children need to know which graphemes
can represent the separate phonemes they have identified in the word they
want to spell. They also need to know how to spell what the national
curriculum refers to as 'common exception words', so called because their
GPCs are unusual or have not yet been taught.
[footnote 66]
Knowing how to spell a word 'makes the representation of it sturdy and
accessible for fluent reading' [footnote 67] This is because spelling and
reading call on the same representation - that is, the order of the letters that
make up the word.
The Department for Education's non-statutory curriculum guidance for the
early years, "Development matters', suggests that teachers of Reception-
age children should dictate sentences for children to write that contain only
the taught letter-to-sound correspondences.
[footnote 68]
Similarly, the Year 1
national curriculum programme of study requires pupils to write down
https://wwwgov.uk/govenment/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-review-series-english
12/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
dictated sentences using 'the GPCs and common exception words taught
so far'
[footnote 69]
Dictation gives children opportunities to practise and apply their spelling
knowledge and segmenting skills, without having to compose sentences by
themselves. It requires them to distinguish between the sounds they hear in
order to choose the correct graphemes to represent the sounds and to form
the letters correctly. They also have to understand what they are hearing to
distinguish between homophones (for example, 'to'/'two' and 'meat'/'meet').
Handwriting
The national curriculum specifies that children should be taught to correctly
form letters of the correct size and orientation. [footnote 70] This requires effort
and attention, as well as suitable motor skills. There is evidence that
repeated practice in handwriting is necessary to go beyond accuracy to
fluency in letter formation. [footnote 71] There is no need to start the formal
teaching of handwriting before Reception, but children at the end of the
EYFS should be able to 'hold a pencil effectively in preparation for fluent
writing - using the tripod grip in almost all cases'. [footnote 72]
The national curriculum requires children to learn unjoined handwriting
before they 'start using some of the diagonal and horizontal strokes that are
needed to join letters'. [footnote 73] Delaying teaching joined handwriting gives
teachers and children time to focus on other aspects of the writing process,
such as composition, spelling and forming letters correctly.
Research supports the idea that writing letters may be important for
supporting children's early reading development, because it stimulates the
areas of the brain known to underpin successful reading. A small study with
4- to 5-year-olds showed that practice in writing letters 'stroke by stroke'
may be the 'gateway' through which beginning readers learn to recognise
the features of each letter, as well as learning which features are not
important.
[footnote 74]
There is also evidence that repeated practice in handwriting, going beyond
accuracy to fluency, leads to success in higher-level writing tasks.
[footnote 75]
Skilful handwriting has an impact on composition. According to 2 meta-
analyses of research on handwriting instruction, teaching handwriting is
closely associated with the quality, length and fluency of writing. [footnote 76]
As these meta-analyses showed, teaching handwriting can improve writing
because the pupil can spend more time planning, thinking about content
and constructing the sentences.
Based on the above, high-quality English in early years/key stage 1
may have the following features:
Vocabulary is developed explicitly to reduce the word gap in the early
years, and to enable disadvantaged children to develop their
vocabulary faster.
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-engish/curiculum-research-review-series-englsht
13/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
The school prioritises daily teaching of systematic synthetic phonics
from the start of the Reception Year and into key stage 1, until pupils
are fluent in word reading (decoding) and transcription (spelling and
handwriting).
Daily opportunities for children to apply their knowledge of GPCs by
reading 'decodable' books that support their fluency in word reading.
Teachers focus on identifying children who are not able to decode
accurately (or are otherwise at risk of not learning to read) early and
prioritise teaching them to read.
The programme of reading develops pupils' accuracy and speed.
Children practise composition through oral activities before their
transcription becomes fluent.
Children get the practice they need to acquire fluent transcription
skills (spelling and handwriting), which is the foundation for their
progress in writing.
Carefully chosen dictation activities enable pupils to practise and
apply their spelling knowledge and segmenting skill to use the content
they have been taught and to do so without having their working
memories overloaded by composing sentences.
Spoken language
Summary
This section will outline findings that suggest that a strong command of
the spoken word is a crucial outcome of English education. The benefits
of spoken language extend beyond just success at school. Becoming an
articulate, effective communicator forms the basis of democratic
engagement within wider society.
A curriculum for spoken language depends on a range of different
interrelated aspects: physical, linguistic, cognitive, and social and
emotional. The discipline of rhetoric can provide pupils with insight into
how spoken language is used by writers and orators. Opportunities for
pupils to develop their proficiency in spoken language require explicit
teaching of the knowledge, for example vocabulary, and ideas
necessary for effective communication. These opportunities should be
planned carefully, both in English lessons and across other subjects.
The teacher has an important role in modelling competence as a
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-reviewseries-englisha
14/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
speaker and listener, contributing significantly to developing pupils'
spoken language.
A curriculum for spoken language
This section builds on 'The early English curriculum in schools' section of
the review and applies to primary and secondary levels. Research indicates
that there is a correlation between pupils' spoken language skills and their
academic outcomes, social development and emotional development.
[footnote
77]
This suggests a link between spoken language development and
pupils' broader life outcomes. [footnote 78] Therefore, spoken language is an
important goal of the curriculum. Alexander outlines how talk can be
undervalued because its function is considered to be primarily social, but
talk in classrooms is cognitive and cultural and well as social.
[footnote 79]
While it is not discussed in this section, there is a significant amount of
literature on the role of spoken language as a pedagogical tool.
[footnote 80]
Pupils can learn to use dialogic talk, which can then be used to enable
learning across the curriculum. However, there is foundational knowledge of
language that pupils need for comprehension or communication in whatever
modality they are using (this knowledge is explored in the bullet points
below). Given the importance of spoken language, as well as a specific
programme of study for English, there should be a clearly planned provision
for developing pupils' spoken language across the curriculum.
[footnote 81]
For pupils of all ages to use spoken language successfully, they need to
make progress in interrelated aspects of language:
[footnote 82]
physical (vocal control and body language, such as making eye contact
and speaking loudly and clearly)
linguistic (knowledge of vocabulary and grammatical constructions, and
use of rhetorical devices)
cognitive (knowledge of content, organisation of ideas, and tailoring talk
to a specific purpose, such as to persuade or inform). This will include
pupils learning about 'exploratory talk' (to explore new ideas and come to
new understandings) and 'presentational talk' (to share their thinking with
others)
[footnote 83]
Pupils should learn how to pose questions, and use
talk to narrate, explain, speculate, imagine, hypothesise, explore, include,
discuss, argue, reason and justify
[footnote 84]
social and emotional (considering the needs of different listeners,
responding appropriately to others and developing the confidence to
share ideas with different audiences)
It is important to note that spoken language is not just about improved
speech. Pupils also need to develop their ability to collaborate through
conversation.
[footnote 85]
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-review-series-englist
15/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
A curriculum should link these elements. For example, pupils' success in
using spoken language depends on their knowledge of the topic. Even
when classroom talk is chosen as a pedagogy to encourage speculative
and exploratory discussion, pupils need knowledge of possible areas to
explore through discussion and how they can be framed.
Standard English
The register and vocabulary of social talk that pupils might engage in at
home and with their peers is different to the academic or formal register and
vocabulary used in classrooms, in universities and formally in many
workplaces. The national curriculum programmes of study for spoken
language and for writing emphasise the importance of pupils being taught to
use Standard English. A spoken language curriculum should ensure that all
pupils can select and use appropriate grammar and register for audience
and purpose, including Standard English where necessary.
Teaching activities for spoken language
There is an important distinction between what primary and secondary
school pupils need to learn for success in spoken language and the
teaching activities that might promote learning spoken language. This
distinction is important because it cannot be assumed that pupils will learn
the knowledge necessary for effective spoken communication, for example
vocabulary, simply by being encouraged to speak more or through
unstructured activities. That knowledge can be identified and directly taught
and is also acquired through reading.
footnote 86]
Opportunities for pupils of all ages to develop their proficiency should be
planned carefully, both in English lessons and across other subjects.
Classroom activities should allow opportunities for teachers to model
competence as a speaker and listener. This modelling contributes
significantly to developing pupils' spoken language.
[footnote 87]
Teachers should therefore model language forms that pupils might not
encounter away from school, as well as introducing potentially unfamiliar
vocabulary, returning to key words and phrases to embed new knowledge.
This might include teachers reframing pupils' spoken language and asking
pupils to repeat back the reframing.
Pupils of all ages will benefit from frequent opportunities to practise and
apply their new knowledge of spoken language across a range of contexts
and for a range of purposes. [footnote 88] Examples include carefully planned
opportunities for pupils to take part in both 'exploratory talk', which enables
the speaker to try out ideas, and presentational talk', which focuses on
accurate communication.
[footnote 89]
The necessary skills for these forms of
talk require direct and explicit teaching and practice in English.
[footnote 90]
In
addition to the planned aspects of the curriculum, proficiency in spoken
language can be developed through teachers' and pupils' daily interactions.
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-reviewseries-english
16/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
Teachers can support pupils in developing the ability to collaborate in
conversation by providing ground rules. [footnote 91] For example, they can
ensure that all pupils contribute, without any individual dominating. Effective
talk involves turn-taking, managing interactions, active listening and
responding appropriately.
Rhetoric
For older pupils, the discipline of rhetoric can give an insight into how
writers and orators use spoken language. [footnote 92] Pupils can learn how
spoken language is constructed and produced, and the connections
between words, sentences and whole texts or in speech, from individual
utterances to dialogues and speeches. Pupils can learn about the meanings
and nuances of the spoken word, the craft of a writer or speaker, and the
ways in which spoken language conveys, explores and manipulates
meaning. They can grasp the role and effect of rhetorical devices, the range
of registers and social contexts of spoken language in use, the interplay of
speaking, reading and writing, the artistry of spoken language and the
knowledge and skills that underpin that artistry.
Based on the above, high-quality English may have the following
features:
An effective spoken language curriculum identifies the components
that pupils need to learn for successful spoken communication. It
focuses on interrelated aspects that constitute effective spoken
language (physical, linguistic, cognitive, and social and emotional).
Teachers equip pupils with the right knowledge and vocabulary for
them to be able to speak on a topic effectively.
Pupils learn how to take part in exploratory talk and use talk to
present ideas.
There is a focus on ensuring that pupils can select and use
appropriate grammar and register for audience and purpose,
including Standard English where necessary.
Teachers model spoken language for pupils. This includes language
that pupils might not encounter away from school.
The curriculum provides frequent opportunities for pupils to practise,
refine and apply their spoken language knowledge and skills.
Reading
Summary
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-english
17/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
This section sets out findings that suggest that skilled reading requires
accurate, speedy word reading and good language comprehension.
Urgency is necessary to ensure that pupils learn to decode accurately
and with automaticity at the start of primary school. This also allows
pupils to form positive attitudes to reading.
Pupils of all ages need to be taught a broad curriculum that will allow
them to comprehend increasingly complex texts. Reading
comprehension is supported by practising strategies to uncover the
meaning of texts. However, teaching these strategies is time-limited in
its usefulness and unlikely to benefit pupils before they can read
sufficiently fluently, which is most likely to be in upper key stage 2.
Reading comprehension requires knowledge of vocabulary, context,
syntax and narrative structure and the capacity to read fluently. Carefully
choosing texts to be studied in English can support progression, as will
reading in other relevant subjects.
In this section of the review, we will go beyond discussion of what
children need to learn in Reception. We will consider the goals of a high-
quality curriculum in reading for primary- and secondary-age pupils.
Progression in comprehension
Factors that underpin reading comprehension
Three factors underpin reading comprehension and their significance to
comprehension is explored, in turn, below. These factors are:
knowledge - for example, linguistic knowledge, orthographic knowledge
and general knowledge
processes - for example, decoding, word identification, meaning
retrieval, sentence parsing, inferring and comprehension monitoring
general cognitive resources: for example, memory
[footnote 93]
Pupils must understand the language used in the text.
[footnote 94]
Once
pupils' word reading is automatic, any barriers to understanding a text are
far more likely to relate to difficulties with language comprehension than
word-reading problems.
[footnote 95]
Reading comprehension is 'the orchestrated product' of the factors set out
above.
[footnote 96]
Readers use knowledge, processes and general cognitive
resources to produce a mental model of the text.
[footnote 97]
Knowledge informs comprehension
References to knowledge as it informs comprehension can be understood in
different ways:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-english
18/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
in research, references to knowledge for comprehension include
syntactical and lexical knowledge. Thus, the knowledge necessary for
comprehension is 'broadly conceived and may include information such
as the meanings of words, rules of grammar, knowledge of events and
temporal relations, episodes, scenarios, emotions, and characters'.
[footnote 98]
in English schools, references to knowledge for comprehension can
sometimes more specifically refer to a more limited consideration of
'background knowledge', understood as a pupil's knowledge of the text's
context. This might be topic knowledge provided by the teacher to help
the pupil make sense of the text or - more particularly - knowledge that
the pupil can supply in their answers to comprehension questions.
A narrower discussion of knowledge, limited to context, may lead to
confusion when discussing the knowledge needed for comprehension. This
is because it is difficult to disentangle the types of knowledge used in
comprehension. For example, it can be unhelpful to consider vocabulary
separately from contextual knowledge. For comprehension pupils will need
knowledge of vocabulary as well as knowledge of the text's context, and
these are closely intertwined. To understand the text's vocabulary requires a
grasp of the context in which those specific words have been used. This is
because the words that readers know represent concepts and information.
Therefore, these concepts have to be understood to appreciate the meaning
of the words that are read.
[footnote 99]
In this review, we will consider knowledge broadly. Where the term
'background knowledge' is used, this will not preclude an appreciation of
how vocabulary serves as a label for concepts pupils understand from their
contextual knowledge to allow comprehension.
Text complexity and progression in reading comprehension
Considerations of the knowledge necessary for comprehension need to take
account of the texts that pupils might be required to comprehend. In this
review, we consider what knowledge pupils need to learn to comprehend
increasingly complex texts. This knowledge provides a progression model
for reading comprehension. It needs to be identified in a curriculum and
taught to pupils. The national curriculum requires that reading instruction,
through each key stage, should prepare pupils ultimately to read more
complex texts, for example 'to read and appreciate the depth and power of
the English literary heritage'. [footnote 100] Variation in text complexity affects
pupils' reading comprehension. [footnote 101] Therefore, pupils of all ages
need to be taught a curriculum that will allow them to comprehend
increasingly complex texts.
[footnote 102]
For example, the primary curriculum should prepare pupils during key stage
2 to read independently in different subjects and to read a wide range of
fiction and non-fiction. The key stage 2 curriculum should prepare pupils for
key stage 3, at which point texts will include prose, poetry and drama,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englist
19/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
Shakespeare plays and seminal world literature, both contemporary and
pre-1914. The key stage 3 curriculum should prepare pupils for the reading
demands of key stage 4, including literature on the GCSE examination
specifications.
Factors that may affect text complexity for pupils of all ages, and therefore
their comprehension, include:
linguistic features, such as longer or more complicated sentence
structures or less-common, academic or domain-specific
vocabulary
[footnote 103]
textual references to concepts and objects, and knowledge drawn from
experience, including cultural experience
[footnote 104]
cohesion - both in the ideas explored across a text and the language
used to articulate those ideas
footnote 105]
levels of meaning - texts with a single level of meaning are often simpler
to understand than those with multiple levels, for example allegorical or
satirical texts
[footnote 106]
text structure - texts with simple, linear, chronological structures are often
easier to understand than those that have non-linear time sequences or
other structural irregularities and manipulations
footnote 107]
style of narrator - texts with a single, reliable narrator are often more
accessible than those that contain unreliable or multiple narrators
footnote
108]
allusions, cultural references and intertextuality (relationships or
references to other texts)
footnote 109]
These factors are discussed in further detail in the 'Literature' section of this
review.
All these factors mean that it is not possible to measure the complexity of a
text solely by its semantic and syntactic complexity. [footnote 110]
This is
further complicated by the role that a reader's background knowledge plays
in comprehension.
[footnote 111]
The curriculum should ensure that pupils of all ages acquire the knowledge
they need for improved comprehension through reading increasingly
challenging texts at each stage. These can provide a smooth ramp from
listening to stories and poetry in the early years to reading Shakespeare
and 19th-century texts as well as pre-20th-century literary non-fiction.
Without sufficient experience and practice, fluency and comprehension can
stall.
[footnote 112]
At primary and then secondary level, texts should therefore
be carefully selected 'so each text bootstraps the language and knowledge
needed for the next. Gradually, students will be ready for texts of greater
complexity.
footnote 113]
For example, Lemov, Driggs and Woolway highlight
https://wwwgov.uk/govenment/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisa
20/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
the challenge of reading archaic texts, such as Victorian literature, in which
the syntax and vocabulary have passed out of common use. They advocate
preparing younger pupils for archaic texts by ensuring that they read 'pre-
complex' texts first. They give one example of how this can be done by
pupils reading a text such as CS Lewis's 'The Magician's Nephew',
published in 1955.
[footnote 114]
"First in reading The Magician's Nephew, they are alerted to the fact that
people spoke differently then. Over time, they begin to pick up some
of [the text's] rhythm and quirks but at an accessible scale and
wrapped in a story that is engaging perhaps later they read something
that has been written fifty years before that. It is the first step in a
process that gives students access over the long run to the texts of the
past."
Incremental exposure to increasingly difficult texts alone may allow some
pupils to acquire the knowledge they need to read challenging material
independently. However, an effective English curriculum will explicitly
identify what it is that pupils need to learn in order to understand
progressively more complex texts. It is this knowledge, listed below, that
teaching should highlight and develop.
Progression in reading should come from reading a broad range of
increasingly challenging texts. Reading these texts can gradually increase
pupils' 'readiness' for reading the ambitious literature that is the end point of
the national curriculum. The knowledge gained through this reading is
explored in the 'Components of comprehension and effective pedagogies to
teach them' section.
Components of comprehension and effective pedagogies to teach
them
Vocabulary: what words should instruction focus on?
There is a lot of evidence that shows that vocabulary knowledge is
important for comprehension. [footnote 115] It is through reading that most
vocabulary will be encountered. This is because most words and language
patterns occur far more often in written texts than in spoken language.
footnote
116] This remains true of books for young children as well as novels
and non-fiction for older readers. [footnote 117] Therefore, teaching cannot rely
on pupils' experience of spoken language for vocabulary learning. Further to
this, and although we explore the development of vocabulary knowledge in
this section, vocabulary knowledge is also crucial for successful spoken
communication and writing.
Teachers can select texts that contain some vocabulary that is likely to be
unfamiliar but that are not overwhelmingly difficult to understand. While
pupils of all ages will gradually learn vocabulary through repeated
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publicatons/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculun-research-review-series-englisfh
21/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
encounters as they read, there is evidence showing that it is beneficial to
identify and explicitly teach some vocabulary.
[footnote 118]
There are a number of rationales that teachers can use for selecting
vocabulary to teach. The teacher will need to consider pupils' likely prior
vocabulary knowledge. They may look at how frequently a word is used or
the role and utility of particular words.
[footnote 119]
For example, the word
'emphasis' is likely to have high utility and can be used across different
subjects. What have been called 'tier 2' words are high-frequency words
that pupils are likely to encounter across written texts and in more formal
situations than in everyday conversation.
[footnote 120]
An effective curriculum is also likely to teach pupils the meaning of roots
and affixes (prefixes and suffixes). footnote 121 Research has shown that
learning the meaning of common affixes such as un-, dis-, -able and -ing
can help pupils to understand unfamiliar words, as well as being useful for
spelling.
[footnote 122]
Building knowledge about morphemes (the smallest
meaningful units of language) in English can develop vocabulary by helping
pupils to make informed guesses about the possible meanings of new
words, linking new words with familiar ones. footnote 123] Awareness of how
in English the meaning of words can be changed by adding inflections such
as -s, -ed or -er as well, and knowledge of the history of words (etymology)
and how this can affect meaning, will also support pupils' vocabulary and
reading comprehension.
[footnote 124]
Ways of teaching vocabulary
Pupils will learn many words incidentally. However, it is also effective to
teach pupils of all ages some vocabulary directly. Older pupils can be taught
the relationships across words and the links between a word's structure,
origin and meaning. [footnote 125] Teaching should avoid complicated activities
that create unnecessary cognitive load for pupils. [footnote 126] Pupils usually
need to encounter a word a number of times in different contexts for it to
enter their working vocabulary.
[footnote 127]
Teaching how new words function in different contexts is more effective than
simply learning definitions.
[footnote 128]
A synthesis of research on vocabulary
instruction found that interactive teacher-to-pupil activities, during which
pupils encountered and used new words in a variety of contexts, produced
bigger gains in vocabulary development than just reading or adding
definitions
to the words. [footnote 129] Planned and spaced recall can also be a
valuable strategy for learning and can improve the transfer of knowledge to
new contexts.
[footnote 130]
Knowledge of morphology, which is also vital for spelling, plays an important
role in comprehension. Activities can be designed to help pupils recognise
that similar-looking words might be related in meaning, even if they are
pronounced differently - such as 'inquire' and 'inquisition'. These activities
can help pupils' understanding because there is a strong correlation
between spelling and comprehension.
[footnote 131]
https://wwwgov.uk/govenment/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-engish/curiculum-reseerch-review-series-engish
22/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
Knowledge of context
As outlined in the 'Knowledge informs comprehension' section above, it is
difficult to clearly delineate knowledge of the context of the text from other
knowledge needed for comprehension, such as knowledge of vocabulary.
This is because understanding a text's vocabulary requires a grasp of the
context in which those specific words can be used. The background
knowledge needed to understand the words, phrases and ideas in a text
goes well beyond socio-historical background to the text or topic knowledge.
However, readers with good topic knowledge will have better
comprehension of texts related to that topic than of texts that they know less
about.
[footnote 132]
As knowledge development is related to reading, weaker
readers often have less relevant knowledge than their peers. [footnote 133]
Teaching, therefore, needs to provide the contextual knowledge that pupils
require to adequately comprehend a text. This does not, however, mean
that it is necessarily useful to pre-teach swathes of background to an
individual text if that knowledge is not essential for adequate
comprehension of that text. Indeed, through reading itself, pupils can find
out about the world beyond their own experience, including what they learn
in other lessons on the curriculum. Teachers should therefore give pupils an
abundant and rich variety of accessible texts to read in relevant classes
across the curriculum as well as independently. Over time, this reading can
gradually broaden pupils' horizons and their knowledge of words, phrases
and ideas and ensure that they become increasingly able to comprehend
the texts they will encounter in their later education and through life.
Knowledge of narrative structure
Comprehension is also affected by the extent to which pupils are familiar
with the type and structure of the text they are reading, including the
features of a story. [footnote 134] Different texts have their own structures, such
as compare and contrast, sequences, cause and effect, and descriptions.
[footnote 135] As a result, an effective reading curriculum will contain a broad
range of text genres, styles and narrative structures, and types of non-fiction
texts.
[footnote 136]
From the early years onwards, pupils should become increasingly familiar
with the structures and features of narrative texts, such as setting,
character, plot and conflict. This is not the same as knowing the meaning of
these terms but rather an increasing familiarity with different structures and
features of texts that can come through broad and deep engagement in a
rich variety of texts provided by the teacher. Once pupils are fluent readers,
teachers can draw their attention to these features to better enable pupils to
recognise them in future reading. Older primary-age pupils can use texts
that contain a much wider range of structural elements, such as subplots
and multiple problems.
Knowledge of syntax
Comprehension also depends on the knowledge needed to understand
sentences (knowledge of syntax). [footnote 137] This knowledge of sentences
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-reviewseries-engist
23/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
allows reading with accuracy and sufficient speed for fluency.
[footnote 138]
Comprehension depends on understanding whole sentences and the
connections between them, in addition to understanding the meaning of
individual words in those sentences. Ability to follow the internal coherence
of a text and understanding the syntax of a sentence support
comprehension. This ability includes recognising referents (words that refer
back to an earlier part of the text); for example, older pupils will need to
recognise that, when Cassius says to Brutus, he doth bestride the
narrow world / Like a Colossus , , the pronoun 'he' refers to Caesar.
Pupils who can read fluently should increasingly encounter texts that
contain more, and more complex, multi-clause sentences. An effective
curriculum can include teachers reading accessible but more complex texts
aloud. Pupils need to hear and read these texts regularly to help them
become familiar with the structure of sentences and therefore increase the
likelihood that they will be able to understand the texts they read
independently.
[footnote 139]
When pupils understand the meaning conveyed through a sentence
structure, they are better able to read aloud with an understanding of the
possible and intended phrasing, rhythm, expressiveness and stress of
sentences (also known as prosody).
[footnote 140]
Rasinski suggests a focus on 4 aspects of prosody:
[footnote 141]
expression and volume
phrasing
smoothness
pace
Prosody is important because it connects children's knowledge of written
sounds and words with spoken language and allows children to read with
meaning. It 'completes the bridge by connecting to comprehension'.
[footnote
142]
As well as providing a strong basis for comprehension as a whole, prosody
can also be used 'to resolve ambiguous meaning at the phrase level'.
[footnote 143]
Simple examples might include distinguishing between 'the
greenhouse' and 'the green house' or resolving the ambiguity in 'Paula
phoned her friend from Alabama' [footnote 144] Whether reading aloud or
silently, the reader integrates information at the level of words, phrases and
sentences with semantic information and 'will often pause at the end of a
clause or sentence to facilitate this processing'
[footnote 145]
Teaching reading fluency
The most important factor explaining variation in pupils' reading fluency is
amount of exposure to text. [footnote 146] This can include oral exposure to
https://wwwgov.uk/govenment/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-reviewseries-englist
24/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
text.
[footnote 147
There are stark differences in the amount of reading
practice children get both inside and outside the classroom. As Stanovich
and Nathan outline, if children are to become fluent readers, 'they need to
read a lot'.
[footnote 148]
Beyond the crucial importance of a large amount of exposure to text,
research pinpoints a number of strategies that can improve fluency.
[footnote
149]
Padeliadu and Giazitzidou's review of research on reading fluency
identified several strategies that were shown to support fluency
development. One of the most effective strategies was repeated readings of
texts. Repeated reading allows pupils to apply their knowledge to new
material and is effective for a wide range of pupils from the early years
onwards. The evidence reported in the review showed that repeated
reading was effective for pupils with reading difficulties.
[footnote 150]
Research found that simultaneously listening to and reading along with texts
was a valuable strategy with struggling readers. The teacher's reading
shows how the text should sound and, in doing so, highlights the 'prosodic
cues' in a text to pupils. However, the demands on working memory of this
activity suggest that pupils' comprehension might be lower when reading-
while-listening.
[footnote 151]
This possible limitation should be considered
when deciding whether this strategy will fulfil the aims of the lesson. It would
also seem counterproductive to undertake this sort of activity before pupils
have mastered the alphabetic code.
A third strategy considered in the same review was discussing the wording
in a text before reading it. Pupils can practise key words in the text before
they read it for themselves.
And a final strategy is to provide opportunities for pupils to perform and read
aloud.
[footnote 152]
The national curriculum says that pupils in Years 5 and 6
should have opportunities for 'preparing poems and plays to read aloud and
to perform, showing understanding through intonation, tone and volume so
that the meaning is clear to an audience'.
footnote 153]
Comprehension processes and the limits of teaching comprehension
strategies
A range of processes allow knowledge to be activated and processed.
These processes include decoding, word identification, meaning retrieval,
sentence parsing, inferring and comprehension monitoring.
There is good evidence that significant aspects of these processes happen
automatically, for example inference generation.
[footnote 154]
Skilled readers
may unconsciously use a range of comprehension strategies to uncover the
meaning of texts. However, pupils may need to be taught to use strategies
that prompt comprehension processes. For example, teachers may
recognise the phenomenon of a child who sounds fluent but has limited
understanding of what has been read. This may be particularly the case
when pupils regularly do not have all the knowledge (outlined in the
https://www.govuk/govenment/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculun-research-review-series-englisfh
25/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
Components of comprehension and effective pedagogies to teach them'
section above) that they may need to readily comprehend a text and
therefore may have never grown to expect to understand the texts they read
even if they can decode them. Therefore, some pupils may need to build the
habit of constructing meaning as they read. There is plentiful evidence of
the benefit of teaching pupils reading comprehension strategies that direct
them to pay attention to the meaning of the text.
[footnote 155]
The NRP found
that those approaches that emphasise pupils' understanding of the
reasoning and mental processes involved in reading strategically were most
successful.
[footnote 156]
Studies that have investigated the longer-term effectiveness of teaching and
practising reading comprehension strategies suggest that reading
comprehension instruction can be beneficial when it is brief and explicit.
[footnote 157]
Evidence suggests that a total of 10 to 15 sessions of instruction
is sufficient.
[footnote 158]
Research also suggests that there is little point in
teaching these reading strategies before pupils have gained fluency, which
is likely to be in upper key stage 2.
[footnote 159]
The implications of these findings are significant, given that it could be
assumed that if pupils struggle to comprehend texts, then more teaching of
strategies must be necessary. Beyond some time-limited instructional and
practice sequences, comprehension strategies are unlikely to be useful as a
continued learning objective for most pupils. Willingham and Lovette argue
that this is because these strategies are not skills that can be honed through
repeated practice regardless of context. Rather, they are useful
metacognitive strategies, or maxims, that will be applied successfully when
pupils have enough relevant knowledge of the text to do so.
[footnote 160]
This underlines the importance of ensuring that pupils read a breadth of
literature. This will allow pupils to embed strategies they have learned even
when they no longer need the time-limited instructional prompting of the
teacher, as well as ensuring that pupils encounter the range of knowledge
they need for successful comprehension. Comprehension strategies do not
provide an ongoing progression in reading. Progress comes from
developing the knowledge needed to understand increasingly challenging
texts. This can be illustrated when considering inference.
Making inferences
Inference depends on a reader's vocabulary knowledge, contextual
knowledge and knowledge of language structures. The reader needs this
knowledge to make links between different parts of the text and construct a
robust mental model of it. This is because language is 'surrounded by a
cloud of taken-for-granted, unspoken knowledge, without which the said
cannot be understood'.
[footnote 161]
Readers use these links and background information to fill in details not
explicitly stated by the author. [footnote 162] Therefore, knowledge of the text
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
26/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
content is needed to make inferences and this is why general practice in
making inferences will not lead to a general inferencing skill.
To illustrate this point, in the following example, the reader unconsciously
draws from background knowledge, for example of vocabulary and context,
to realise that it is Alison's birthday, although we are not told this: 'As the
singing came to an end, Alison blew out the candles. Everyone clapped.'
The reader integrates the new information from the text with their existing
knowledge - in this case, about birthday parties.
Pupils are likely to be able to make successful inferences when the
knowledge they currently possess, initially just of the everyday world, is
adequate to make those inferences. This ability to make inferences is likely
to be well developed because everyday conversation requires regular
inferences.
[footnote
163] A review of research looking at the impact of
inference instruction suggests that, as with other reading comprehension
strategies, focused and time-limited instruction related to inferences can
increase comprehension for primary and secondary school pupils. [footnote
164] Nonetheless, a pupil with limited academic or cultural knowledge will
find it difficult to make inferences about non-everyday topics about which
they know little.
Comprehension monitoring
Skilled readers monitor their comprehension and detect when it breaks
down. For example, when they spot an apparent inconsistency, they re-read
or apply their background knowledge of the topic. In the "Comprehension
processes and the limits of teaching comprehension strategies' section
above, we discuss how pupils may not expect to understand a text when
they regularly do not have all the knowledge that they may need for
comprehension. These less-skilled readers may not know that it is important
to think while reading.
This 'comprehension monitoring' correlates closely with wider reading
comprehension. As we might expect, older pupils and more expert readers
tend to be better at detecting when their understanding has broken down.
For this reason, pupils need to be alerted to the importance of thinking
about what they read and understanding the content.
Comprehension strategies have an ongoing use as a pedagogical tool
When pupils no longer need to be taught to use comprehension strategies,
it is reasonable to continue to use these strategies as a pedagogical tool.
When a teacher needs pupils to think carefully about a certain meaning of a
particular text, they might direct pupils to apply a particular strategy they
have learned, for example summarising or identifying the main point. In this
situation, the primary curriculum goal is not to teach or practise a strategy
(when pupils are already familiar with the strategy from prior teaching).
Rather, the teacher can direct pupils to use a strategy to draw out a
particular aspect of the text and its meaning, which may not otherwise have
been readily apparent to pupils, given their current knowledge.
https://wwwgov.uk/govenment/publicatons/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-reviewseries-engish
27/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
Through applying the strategy to consider a feature of the text, pupils
acquire new knowledge that may enable them to comprehend other and
more challenging texts in the future. While there might be good reasons for
selecting comprehension strategies as a pedagogical tool, this does not
mean that there is a benefit from pupils discovering an insight (about a text
or otherwise) for themselves over learning such an insight from their
teacher.
[footnote 165]
Implications of limits to working memory
The amount of information a person can hold temporarily in their working
memory is limited. [footnote 166 Research suggests that interventions targeted
at improving working memory are unlikely to improve pupils' reading. [footnote
167]
Instead, being able to draw on knowledge needed for comprehension
from long-term memory and being able to decode accurately and read
fluently help to make cognitive space available for pupils to consider
meaning. Curriculum time is therefore likely to be most effectively used in
ensuring that pupils read fluently and to develop their wider curriculum
knowledge and vocabulary so that working memory can be directed towards
making meaning from a text.
[footnote 168]
Reading independently and for pleasure
Research on the benefits of pupils' reading for pleasure is extensive.
[footnote
169]
This research indicates a positive correlation between pupils'
engagement with reading and their attainment in reading, motivation to read
and their self-confidence in reading.
[footnote 170]
Research also suggests a
link between pupils choosing to read and improved general knowledge;
[footnote 171]
a wider vocabulary and better language development;
[footnote
172]
and improved attainment and more positive attitudes to writing.
[footnote
173]
Reading for pleasure is highly desirable. However, an emphasis on reading
for pleasure does not mean it is wise to ignore the positive impact on all
children of exposure to increasingly challenging texts in relevant lessons
across the curriculum. Initiatives like dressing up as book characters,
collecting points and certificates, or creating elaborate displays might also
help to raise awareness of reading. Yet they could also be a distraction,
taking time and energy away from reading itself.
A curriculum for reading for pleasure
The manifold benefits of reading for pleasure might lead to the assumption
that the best starting point is to encourage pupils to read. However,
research suggests that it is the more accomplished readers who choose to
read more.
A meta-analysis of research with children aged 5 to 18 considered
predictors of long-term motivation to read.
footnote 174]
This analysis
suggested that achieving short-term motivation to read is not a predictor for
the long term when compared with pupils becoming accomplished readers
early. The latter is a stronger predictor of later motivation. In other words, if
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-english
28/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
children struggle with reading early on, they may not be persuaded to read
more. The findings emphasise the overriding importance of children getting
off to a successful start with reading, as this is the strongest predictor of
later motivation.
For many, reading for pleasure is something that develops at home, when
books and other reading material are available, and where parents and
carers read with children and also read themselves.
[footnote 175]
For others, it
is vital that the curriculum and wider school culture nurture reading for
pleasure.
Research suggests several strands that form a 'coherent strategy' that
schools can draw on when designing a curriculum that supports reading for
pleasure. These include:
developing teachers' knowledge of children's literature and other texts
developing teachers' knowledge of pupils' current reading practices and
preferences
establishing a 'reading for pleasure pedagogy' that includes reading aloud
and time for pupils who can read fluently to read independently
creating social reading environments, and providing time for informal
book talk and recommendations
supporting staff to become 'reading teachers' who read widely and reflect
on their own and others' reading
creating reading communities, both in and out of school
footnote 176]
Children may enjoy reading but prefer other activities. Making the option of
reading the most readily available seems sensible. When the option is
visible and attractive, it can make it more likely that children will read.
[footnote
177]
Based on the above, high-quality English may have the following
features:
The reading curriculum enables pupils to read increasingly complex
and whole texts.
Teachers develop pupils' reading accuracy, automaticity and prosody.
Time is given to pupils reading a lot of text, across the school
curriculum, to develop their reading fluency.
Instruction in reading comprehension strategies is time-limited and
explicit.
Knowledge necessary for comprehension is taught explicitly and
includes vocabulary, knowledge of narrative structure, lexical and
syntactical knowledge, as well as knowledge of context and ideas in
the text.
htps://wwwgov.uk/government/publicatons/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-researchreview-series-englsht
29/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
Teachers emphasise the relationships between words, helping pupils
to explore morphology and etymology to support their comprehension
and spelling.
Teachers encourage pupils to read for pleasure while ensuring that
they become accomplished readers as soon as possible.
Planned and spaced recall helps pupils to retain the new vocabulary
they have learned.
Writing
Summary
Fluent writing depends on transcription (spelling and handwriting) and
composition, which involves knowledge about the topic and discourse
knowledge about how to write effectively. Explicit teaching of
foundational skills, including spelling and handwriting, sentence
construction, control of grammar and use of vocabulary, allows all pupils
to write effectively. Cycles of planning, drafting, revising and editing can
improve writing but do not significantly improve motivation to write or
improve the quality of struggling writers' compositions.
Features of an effective writing curriculum in primary and secondary
schools
Learning to write well allows pupils to share their ideas, communicate with
others and learn from the wider curriculum. The 2014 national curriculum,
unlike the 1998 National Literacy Strategy, does not require pupils to be
taught to write particular genres or text types. [footnote 178] It focuses on
writing for different purposes: 'to describe, narrate, explain, instruct, give
and respond to information, and argue'. [footnote 179] Across the different
phases, pupils will produce many different forms of writing, including: [footnote
180]
"
well-structured formal expository and narrative essays; stories,
scripts, poetry and other imaginative writing; notes and polished scripts
for talks and presentations; and a range of other narrative and non-
narrative texts, including arguments, and personal and formal letters."
An effective writing curriculum will give pupils opportunities to develop their
proficiency in 2 interrelated areas of writing:
transcription (spelling and handwriting)
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-engish/curiculum-reserch-review-series-english
30/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
composition (articulating ideas and structuring them in speech and
writing)
Transcription
Fluent transcription skills are the foundations of writing. If pupils master
these, they can then focus their attention on developing, organising and
communicating their ideas. If spelling and handwriting are not fluent, pupils'
working memory is overloaded and it becomes difficult to focus on
composition.
[footnote 181]
An effective writing curriculum should give time for pupils to be taught and
to practise the component skills of transcription, at least in the early stages
of primary. Kellogg has argued that, if pupils do not develop sufficient
fluency in handwriting (or typing) in primary school, this significantly affects
the development of the higher-order processes, such as planning and
generating ideas, and writing and reviewing texts.
[footnote 182]
These transcription skills should continue to be the focus later for any pupils
who lack sufficient fluency. If they struggle with the process of writing as a
whole, interventions aimed at writing overall, like asking them to do further
extended writing, are likely to be ineffective. Instead, research suggests the
focus should be on more time spent practising individually the specific
components of writing that need attention.
Spelling
The early stages of spelling begin with pupils learning phonics - in other
words, knowing how to use the alphabetic code of English to represent the
individual sounds in the words they need to spell. Struggling with these
letter-to-sound correspondences reduces pupils' ability to transmit their
ideas and compose their writing. [footnote 183] : Stopping to think about spelling
a word uses working memory needed for other aspects of writing. Pupils
may then forget ideas or plans that they were holding in their heads. [footnote
184
Spelling has been described as 'a psychological, linguistic, and conceptual
process involving knowledge of the alphabet, syllables, word meaning, and
the history of words'. [footnote 185] Teaching needs to reflect these different
aspects. Although English spelling has many irregularities, these
irregularities frequently follow patterns that, although complex, can be
learned. [footnote 186]
Spelling should be taught explicitly. [footnote 187] The national curriculum
outlines that pupils should know the alphabetic code and 'the role of
morphology and etymology' [footnote 188] Once they have mastered the
alphabetic code, usually in key stage 1, they need to apply this knowledge
in their own writing. [footnote 189] In later years, teachers might support pupils'
spelling by:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculun-research-review-series-englisfh
31/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
encouraging them to draw on their knowledge of phonics to identify the
sounds in more complex words
[footnote 190]
relating spellings to the content being taught (rather than teaching
spelling from 'decontextualised word lists')
[footnote 191]
pre-teaching spellings of challenging words and anticipating common
errors
[footnote 192]
ensuring that pupils practise spellings, for example by using new
spellings in their writing or writing words from dictation
[footnote 193]
focusing on a word's etymology to show how spelling is related to
meaning and drawing attention to shared morphemes in words, even
when the sounds in the related words differ (for example, 'vine' and
'vineyard')
[footnote 194]
adding morphemes (where possible) to words in the national curriculum
Years 5 and 6 word list to spell many related new words (for example,
correspond > correspondence, corresponding, correspondingly,
correspondent)
[footnote 195]
combining vocabulary development with spelling instruction, including
explaining the meaning and function of prefixes and suffixes
[footnote 196]
teaching irregular words by grouping these together where there are
useful similarities (such as grouping the irregular spelling 'two' with
associated regular words such as 'twin', 'twice' and 'twenty')
[footnote 197]
Assessment should identify what words or parts of words pupils find difficult,
so that they can focus on learning these. Low-stakes spelling tests, at
secondary as well as primary level, can support pupils to learn to spell.
[footnote 198]
These might be simply 'pre-tests' so that pupils know which of
the selected words they cannot spell and can then focus their efforts on
those, or 'practice tests' that involve repetition, peer testing and games that
involve correctly spelling words. [footnote 199] These activities can serve as
recall practice after pupils have studied the words so that they retain the
correct spellings in their long-term memory.
Composition
Knowledge of grammar
Pupils need secure knowledge of English grammar for composition. This
enables them to express themselves clearly and creatively through writing.
The grammatical structures of a text carry much of the writer's intended
meaning. Exploring these choices in texts allows the writer to understand
the writer's thoughts better.
[footnote 200]
Research with secondary school pupils suggests that pupils benefit from
being taught how to combine and construct sentences. This not only
https://www.gov.uk/govenment/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-english
32/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
improves the sentences they write but also improves their writing quality
and accuracy.
[footnote 201]
The curriculum can therefore be organised so that pupils are taught to write
using a variety of sentences. Teaching should focus on sentence
recognition, construction, meaning and accuracy. A logical progression
might start with the concept of a sentence, including capitalisation and other
basic punctuation, before progressing from single main clauses to
constructing multi-clause sentences.
For expertise to develop, pupils will benefit from direct instruction and
modelling, followed by extensive, deliberate practice until they are fluent.
Effective practice may consist of short, focused tasks, interspersed with
feedback, before pupils apply what they have learned to their independent
writing.
[footnote 202]
There is also research that indicates that it may be effective for teachers to
model different ways of constructing sentences. [footnote 203] This might
include completing an incomplete sentence, expanding a sentence or
combining 2 or more sentences. [footnote 204] To help pupils to become better
writers, activities such as these need to link to their independent writing.
Pupils need to be prompted to draw on and apply what they have learned
when they come to write.
Research suggests that it can be effective for teachers to focus on the
function and application of grammar within the context of writing.
[footnote 205]
Teaching pupils grammar as part of writing lessons, emphasising the
connections between linguistic features and the effects they can produce,
can have a positive impact, at least for more able writers.
Vocabulary knowledge
Pupils without a specialised vocabulary for different types of text will
struggle to express ideas and opinions in writing
[footnote 206]
A broad and
deep vocabulary leads to better writing. [footnote 207] Teaching vocabulary is
covered in 'Ways of teaching vocabulary' in the reading section.
A curriculum for writing
Perhaps not surprisingly, research suggests that greater knowledge of the
topic leads to better writing. [footnote 208] Additionally, 'discourse knowledge' is
important. This is knowledge about how to write, including knowledge about
the genre of writing, linguistic and grammatical knowledge, and knowledge
about how to carry out specific aspects of the writing process.
[footnote 209
In practice, teachers can ensure that pupils have knowledge of the world
that provides content to write about, for example by ensuring that pupils
write about the curriculum content they have studied. Teachers can help
pupils to build discourse knowledge by making sure that they understand
the characteristics of texts written for specific purposes and audiences, and
htps://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculun-research-review-series-english
33/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
by providing models of effective writing.
[footnote 210]
This gives pupils a
repertoire of features to draw on for their own writing.
Models of writing development suggest that pupils move through several
stages as they become more mature and proficient as writers.
[footnote 211]
Research highlights the starting points and assumptions of novice writers
and how their writing can improve. Pupils need to become increasingly
aware of:
how writing can be used to share new interpretations of their ideas
their reader's needs and existing knowledge
how that reader might interpret what they write
[footnote 212]
Knowledge of the writing process and how to teach it
Repeated meta-analyses have identified several factors that are positively
linked to teaching pupils to write effectively:
[footnote 213]
explicit teaching of foundational writing skills (sentence construction and
control of grammar and syntax, as well as spelling and handwriting),
aiming for fluency
a 'process approach' to writing (see below for an explanation)
direct instruction about writing knowledge and targeted practice
encouraging pupils' self-regulation, such as pupils monitoring their own
performance, setting goals for improvement and making self-
assessments of their writing
opportunities to write frequently
opportunities to work cooperatively on different aspects of writing and
stages of the writing process
A process approach
The process approach involves pupils learning to plan, draft, revise, edit
and publish their writing, and practising these processes. This can develop
pupils' proficiency. [footnote 214] Eventually, they can apply their knowledge
independently.
However, research suggests that a process approach is not sufficient on its
own, has a limited impact and should be used alongside other approaches.
[footnote 215]
The research emphasised the importance of explicit teaching of
foundational skills as a prerequisite, including spelling and handwriting,
sentence construction, control of grammar and use of vocabulary, to allow
all pupils to write effectively.
[footnote 216]
Research suggests that explicit instruction about writing knowledge and
strategies can develop older pupils' writing.
[footnote 217]
Self-regulated
strategy development (SRSD) is an approach to teaching writing strategies
htps://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-review-series-englislh
34/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
that has been found to be effective in helping pupils learn the specific
discourse knowledge needed for effective writing. This knowledge includes
general and task-specific writing strategies, the background knowledge
needed to use these strategies, and procedures for regulating these
strategies.
[footnote 218]
The 6 stages of SRSD are:
1. Pupils are taught the background knowledge they need to use a writing
strategy effectively.
2. The teacher explicitly describes and discusses the purpose and benefit of
the strategy.
3. The teacher models how to use the strategy.
4. Pupils memorise the steps/components of the strategy.
5. The teacher supports and scaffolds pupils' mastery of the strategy.
6. Pupils use the strategy independently.
At each stage, pupils have opportunities to learn and practise the main
components. This can be particularly effective for less confident writers.
[footnote 219]
Because the strategies break up the complex process of writing
into manageable smaller parts, each of which can be taught, practised and
combined, SRSD instruction helps pupils to overcome the limits of their
working memory and processing capacities. Research also suggests that
these strategies are motivating for young writers, because pupils can write
successfully and are likely to attribute their success to something they can
control, such as following a specific process or working hard on a task.
[footnote 220]
In addition to approaches built on specific stages, model texts can be used
effectively as worked examples. [footnote 221] Reading and studying extracts
and short stories help pupils to build background knowledge that they can
then recall and apply when writing their own versions.
[footnote 222]
Although discourse knowledge of the features of certain text types and
genres of writing is important, [footnote 223] listing the features that pupils must
include in a piece of writing can lead to writing to follow mark schemes, as
noted in the 'Assessment' section. This might lead to pupils using textual
and language features without understanding why they are useful and what
purposes they serve. [footnote 224] This might be avoided by emphasising the
audience for, and purpose of, the writing and encouraging pupils to tailor
their language and structure to these rather than trying to replicate the
features of a specific genre or text type.
Motivation
Research suggests that motivation to write, and a classroom and school
environment that promotes it, is correlated strongly both with pupils'
attitudes to writing and their skill as writers. [footnote 225] Factors associated
with motivation include:
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-english
35/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
writing for real audiences and purposes
writing collaboratively with peers
a choice of topic
the desire to share ideas with an audience
[footnote 226]
Motivation can come from enjoying or being engaged with writing itself. It
can also come from external factors, such as:
pride in creating a pleasing piece of work
accomplishing something after overcoming difficulty
mastering something that will be important when obtaining qualifications
for the workplace
Based on the above, high-quality English may have the following
features:
The curriculum secures the knowledge needed for successful writing:
knowledge about the topic and knowledge about how to write.
Pupils' accuracy and automaticity in transcription are developed early
on and secured by lower key stage 2, so that older pupils are able to
pay attention to the higher-level processes of composing, planning,
writing and revision.
Pupils write frequently, for a range of audiences and purposes (once
they have sufficient accuracy and automaticity in transcription).
Teachers directly teach sentence construction, control of grammar
and syntax, so that pupils can use them with accuracy, confidence
and increasing flair.
Teachers teach older pupils to master the components of how to plan,
draft, revise and edit their writing.
Pedagogical approaches for pupils with special
educational needs and/or disabilities
The general principles from research into effective teaching outlined in this
review are just as relevant for pupils with special educational needs and/or
disabilities (SEND), whether learning English or any other subject.
Research shows that pupils with SEND do not generally benefit from
differentiated teaching, activities or resources to achieve a curriculum goal.
[footnote 227]
Differentiation is not the same as targeted teaching to break
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curicuum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-english
36/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
down or reinforce aspects of the curriculum, for example repetition of
important phonic knowledge.
Teachers may attribute weaknesses in reading to a pupil having dyslexia
rather than having gaps in their phonic knowledge. This can also lead to
teachers using reading interventions that have an alternative approach
rather than teaching systematic synthetic phonics. However, reading
requires the same phonic knowledge for all children. Teachers can help
pupils overcome difficulties by ensuring that they learn GPCs; pupils with
SEND are highly likely to need much more frequent repetition. Assessment
should be used to identify a child's specific knowledge gaps. These gaps
and their identification are considered in the 'Assessment' section of this
review.
Based on the above, high-quality English may have the following
features:
Teaching does not rely on differentiated teaching, activities or
resources to achieve a curriculum goal.
Reading interventions incorporate training in knowledge of letter-
sound correspondences, and how to apply knowledge of phonics to
reading and spelling.
Struggling pupils have more opportunities for repetition where
necessary. This can secure essential knowledge to automaticity.
Literature
Summary
An English literature curriculum should identify the knowledge pupils will
need to make progress in English literature. Pupils need to learn
epistemic knowledge of how critics apply different perspectives as well
as knowing about influential readings of specific texts and how
interpretations of texts can be reached. Pupils also require contextual
and aesthetic knowledge to appreciate a text.
Knowledge can be acquired through studying carefully chosen and
sequenced texts that become increasingly complex in style and
substantial in content and themes. Studying carefully sequenced texts
can gradually increase the knowledge pupils have, which in turn allows
them to comprehend new literature. This learning will best be achieved
https://www.gov.uk/government/publicatons/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-reviewseries-englisht
37/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
with some explicit teaching and modelling, for example, of different
interpretations.
The study of English literature
Literature is at the heart of the subject of English. It has profound effects on
our thoughts and on the ways in which we experience the world. It can
shape our inner lives, and our identity. Novels provide scope for the
exploration of worlds: real and imagined; far and near. Drama can depict
intense moral dilemmas, domestic conflicts and powerful moments in
history. Poetry, because it works in special ways, can convey heartfelt
emotions and epiphanies. Literature also contributes to the big debates in
society and to political and social discourse.
The language in literature - the words writers choose and how they use
them - can fire our imagination and introduce us to new ways of knowing.
The study of literature as a discipline seeks to explain this power.
This section discusses how the content, scope and sequence of the
literature curriculum, which is not necessarily specified in the national
curriculum, can best enable primary- and secondary-school pupils to
achieve the goals of the national curriculum. There is no fixed demarcation
between this section and the previous parts of this review that discuss
reading comprehension and reading for pleasure. However, this section
explores the specific body of knowledge, additional to that already
discussed, that enables the disciplinary study of literature.
This part of the review is different in character from other sections because
the empirical literature is more limited. We have, however, drawn on a wide
and diverse range of sources including opinion pieces and theoretical
articles. In some cases, the overarching argument presented in these
sources is not fully aligned to the principles of the EIF, but we decided to
include them because they are indicative of the highly nuanced nature of
the topic. The EIF and the research underpinning it remain the lenses
through which the insights and research on literature is considered, framed
and presented.
Literary knowledge
As pupils advance through school, the curriculum in English, including
literature studies, should include the subject-specific prerequisite knowledge
needed for achieving the subject's curriculum goals.
A strong curriculum will develop pupils' epistemic knowledge, defined by
the OECD as 'the understanding of how expert practitioners of disciplines
work and think'. [footnote 228] Some commentary uses the term 'disciplinary
knowledge' to describe a similar idea. Epistemic knowledge helps pupils to
'find the purpose of learning, understand the application of learning and
extend their disciplinary knowledge'. [footnote 229] For literature study, this
might include learning how critics apply different perspectives (critical
https://wwwgov.uk/govenment/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-engish/curiculum-reseerch-review-series-english.
38/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
positions) to key concepts, as well as knowing about influential readings of
specific texts. It also might include knowing that literary scholars and critics
use evidence from the text and other relevant contemporaneous texts to
justify their interpretations.
This review draws on Atherton, Snapper and Green to define 4 fields of
literary knowledge. The following table is an adaptation of the 5 areas of
literary knowledge identified by Atherton, Snapper and Green for teaching
English literature at 16 to 19. The 4 areas described in the table, and what
each covers, focus on those that relate to the EIF and the national
curriculum.
[footnote 230]
Knowledge
What it covers
The history and
This includes: history of literature; literary forms;
development of
narrative; genre; poetry; drama; the novel; non-fiction;
literature
literary movements; how significant aspects of literature
(for example, narrative or character) function in different
forms, genres or even other media; how literary texts
respond to historical or ethical events; and the
relationship between literature and broader social and
cultural movements.
The craft of the
This includes: how and why writers, including the pupils
writer
themselves, use language, form and structure, genre and
conventions to respond to social and cultural contexts
and respond intertextually to other works.
The response
This includes: how and why readers, including first and
of the reader
foremost the pupils themselves, respond to, interpret and
value texts, balancing personal enjoyment with
judgement and understanding of wider social and
historical contexts; understanding works of literature in
the context of life; and making and judging inferences.
The nature of
This includes: the role of literary study, literary criticism
literary study
and literary theory; how different approaches and ways of
reading impact on what and how we read; how students
value the study of literature; how to analyse perceptively,
and write and develop their own critical voices in
discussion; and the use of context.
The 4 fields above also draw on contextual knowledge, which is
transferable between texts. In the case of historical context, this knowledge
needs to be carefully selected. For example, pupils studying the Victorian
novel may not need an extended preamble on key events in the reign of
Queen Victoria. Rather, the specific knowledge that enables pupils to enter
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publicatons/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-reviewseries-englisht
39/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
the imaginative world of the text should be identified. Historical context for a
work of literature is not an end in itself. It might be useful to know that in
Victorian times streets were cobbled and richer people travelled in hansom
cabs. This knowledge may need to be explicitly taught or it may emerge
through the study of the text rather than through teaching before reading.
The fields above also draw on aesthetic knowledge. This knowledge
enables appreciation and thus enjoyment of a literary work. For example,
knowing that, in Shakespeare's time, a nunnery was also slang for a brothel
means that Hamlet's command to Ophelia, 'Get thee to a nunnery', is even
more heart-breaking and emotionally charged. Enjoyment and knowledge
can grow through text-based conversations, discussions and debates.
Progression in literature through carefully chosen and sequenced
texts
Through the study of carefully chosen literature (see the Sequencing text
choices for progression: building readiness' section), pupils' epistemic
knowledge and capacity to appreciate literature can grow over time. For
instance, pupils can gain an increasing understanding of the craft of the
writer (including the specific language, grammar and syntax used in each
text) through studying a carefully chosen sequence of texts over time. They
also gain knowledge of the main characters, the plot and the literary
techniques employed, and will have a progressively better grasp of the role
of the reader and the nature of literature. This allows pupils to make
increasingly meaningful connections between specific knowledge from
different texts. This could be through a selection of texts that allow pupils to
learn how writers use certain tropes in specific genres (for example,
entrapment in gothic literature gives pupils a conceptual framework for
connecting characters in 'The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde' with
characters in 'Jane Eyre').
Appreciation of English literature and key components
Our review has identified that there is specific component knowledge
needed for comprehension and that novices benefit from learning these
components. While pupils might engage meaningfully with unmediated text,
it is the purpose of the curriculum to identify what they may need to learn,
step by step, to be successful. This is not to say that some key aspects of a
literature curriculum that work holistically can never form part of the earlier
curriculum while components are still being mastered. For example, the
curriculum can include meaningful personal responses to narratives that
might be possible even if the components necessary to more fully
understand those narratives have not yet been learned. In the very early
stages, this form of literary knowledge can be developed by discussing
stories that teachers read aloud to children or by asking pupils about how a
story read aloud makes them feel.
Standish suggests that pupils can reach a possible 'transitional' point
somewhere between late key stage 2 and early key stage 3.
[footnote 231]
At
this point, pupils may have the capacity to understand different
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
40/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
interpretations of literature. Teachers might introduce pupils to
interpretations of literature that pupils can choose, adapt or reject. This
would not be to stifle original interpretations, but to give pupils a useful
framework for developing their own interpretations, as well as knowledge of
subject-specific terminology.
Novices learn more efficiently by studying worked examples, while experts
can learn from inquiry-based activities that allow them to apply their broad
conceptual knowledge. [footnote 232] Expertise in English literature is
characterised by the ability to carry out critical inquiry, engage in debates
about meaning and explore how the text functions as a work of art.
However, these practices need to develop over time. This will best be
achieved through some explicit teaching and modelling different
interpretations (worked examples) and the necessary component
knowledge that underpins them.
Pedagogy for novices in literature is different than for experts
There are possible implications of the novice/expert research mentioned in
the paragraph above. [footnote 233] If teachers use a purely inquiry-based
approach from the start - in which pupils are expected to produce
responses to texts with minimal guidance - the potential for success may be
limited. For example, pupils may not learn what determines a credible or
justifiable interpretation. They may also lack the background knowledge
required to produce one.
Implications for pupils' written literary analysis
From their earliest years, children benefit from listening to adults read to
them and recount stories verbally. Ongoing reading of carefully chosen and
sequenced texts can ensure that pupils learn more about how stories are
structured and how plots work. These understandings in turn make pupils
better writers as well as readers.
Analytical writing is a composite process that involves multiple individual
components, some learned through studying literature and some being
explicitly part of the writing curriculum. Pupils need to be able to embed
evidence, use appropriate subject terminology, apply precise vocabulary
and evaluate interpretations, including their own interpretations. If pupils are
to succeed at analytical writing, they need to be secure in each of these
components. The curriculum should therefore include a range of subject-
appropriate writing activities that require the use of the components for
writing that pupils have learned.
Applying insights from cognitive psychology such as spacing and
interleaving
Tharby suggests that insights from cognitive psychology can be used to
ensure that pupils learn the literature curriculum and that this will allow them
to appreciate that 'literature is a beautiful, throbbing nexus, not a set of
unrelated texts'. [footnote 234] He qualifies this, stating that he has 'deep
misgivings. about a crude scientific application' of cognitive psychology to
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
41/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
curriculum planning. He suggests that the literature curriculum should be
structured so that carefully selected content is revisited. He advocates
spacing and interleaving content in literature to create a spiral-structured
curriculum.
Some research suggests that spacing and interleaving might be useful for
structuring some content in the literature curriculum. Appel and Richter
show that some subject-specific 'habits of mind' that come from reading
fictional narratives, such as empathy, do not present themselves
immediately. [footnote 235] This pause before the results show is known as an
'absolute sleeper effect'. For sleeper effects to occur, a gestation period is
required. In this time, pupils can rethink and relive what they have read.
Spending some time on unrelated activities can be beneficial.
Elliott suggests that interleaving might help pupils make connections
between 'texts and concepts, to create a larger schema of how literature
works'
[footnote
236]
She adds the caveat that 'like all tools, they are not good
in and of themselves: it is the content that makes the difference'.
Sequencing text choices for progression: building readiness
We have already explored text choices in the reading comprehension
section (see 'Text complexity and progression in reading comprehension'),
but there is additional detail that is especially relevant when selecting texts
specifically for English literature, which is explored below. Additionally:
[footnote 237]
"It is important to recognise that the books students read and study in
school are finite - a scarce and valuable resource. these few books
form the foundation of their knowledge of how literature works within and
interacts with society, so teachers must select them like the precious
resource they are."
Over time, texts studied should become increasingly complex in style and
substantial in content and themes. In the 'Literary knowledge' section, we
identify the range of knowledge pupils need to comprehend a text. Quality
literary narratives tend to use a greater variety of sentence structures than
simpler, easier narratives. This is important because it enables pupils to
gain important grammatical knowledge that they can use in their own
writing. It also builds 'readiness' for the complex syntax used in 19th-century
narratives that are studied in key stage 4. Therefore, text selection is not as
simple as moving more archaic texts or texts with adult themes to key
stages 2 or 3. If pupils are required to read texts but do not have the
knowledge they need to read fluently and understand them, whatever the
ambition, pupils will not gain the hoped-for outcomes from reading those
texts.
Texts may be chosen because they prepare pupils for later texts that they
will study or writers they will encounter. Counsell calls this 'curriculum
readiness' and argues:
footnote 238]
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-engish/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
42/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
"We need to take seriously the possibility that a curriculum can turn (say)
a disadvantaged, vocab-poor Year 5 into a pupil who carries such
reference points in poetry that they are ready to notice what is new and
startling in (say) Romantic poetry before they hit Year 10."
Stoneman describes this readiness as 'deliberate crafting' in which 'we help
knowledge to manifest itself indirectly but dynamically in future learning of
other curricular content'. [footnote 239] It is very different from GCSE texts
being taught in key stage 3. This would narrow the curriculum rather than
create readiness for those texts when they are studied at GCSE.
An example of text choice for curriculum readiness might be reading 'The
Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time' to create readiness for
Perkins Gilman's novella, 'The Yellow Wallpaper', because one is more
accessible than the other but both use unreliable narrators. Building
readiness is not solely about themes and content of texts.
A coherent sequence of texts
In the section above, we discuss the importance of sequencing carefully
selected literature texts so that they are increasingly complex in style and
substantial in content and themes. Through the study of carefully chosen
literature, teachers can develop pupils' epistemic knowledge so that their
capacity to appreciate literature can grow over time. Therefore, as well as
text complexity being a criterion for selecting individual texts, the sequence
of these over time can enable a coherent progression.
Didau explores different curriculum possibilities that provide coherence.
[footnote 240] For example, he suggests choosing texts that illustrate the
development of English language or texts that illustrate the story of literature
and its forms over time. Alternatively, a thematic approach might be chosen
that weaves the threads of metaphor, story, argument, pattern, grammar
and context as enablers of disciplinary considerations for pupils learning
literature. Didau does not argue for any one of the models above but
suggests that coherent text choices will allow pupils to appreciate past
literature.
Studying complex and whole texts
Studying one substantial complex text can do a lot of curricular 'heavy
lifting'. It can support pupils to develop and use knowledge across the
categories detailed in this section. A text like this might use a complex
narrative viewpoint to tell a story, and explore multiple or sophisticated
themes. It might also contain allusions, cultural references and intertextual
links.
In some circumstances, carefully chosen extracts from literary texts can
have a purpose in the curriculum. However, there is research that suggests
that whole texts read aloud and at a faster pace than usual (as opposed to
extracts) are important, including for weaker readers. Research by the
University of Sussex with 343 pupils aged 12 to 14 in 10 schools found that
https://wwwgov.uk/govenment/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-english
43/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
weaker readers made 16 months' progress in reading comprehension when
they read 2 challenging novels in class in 12 weeks.
[footnote 241]
There are other disciplinary-focused arguments for the study of whole texts.
Sehgal Cuthbert suggests that, as the reader works their way through a
whole work of literature, meaning is built up and layered and their
responses evolve. [footnote 242] In addition, some specific forms of the novel
need to be read in their entirety for the form to realise its intention. For
example, the Bildungsroman, which aims to show the development of the
protagonist's mind and character from childhood through to adulthood,
needs to be read as a whole to achieve that aim.
A disciplinary-based approach to relevancy
It is, arguably, important for the curriculum to introduce pupils to texts that
broaden their horizons, as well as enabling them to experience the novelty
and beauty of rich language. Sehgal Cuthbert suggests that texts should
have 'sufficient aesthetic form to encourage broader and deeper
interpretations that demand greater imaginative effort'
[footnote 243]
Applebee
argues that the curriculum should be imagined as a conversation between
pupils and the world mediated by teachers. He says that 'the process of
schooling must be a process of actually entering into particular traditions of
knowing and doing'. footnote 244] However, sometimes, text choice can be
restricted by notions of what Warwick refers to as the 'tyranny of relevance'.
[footnote 245]
According to Applebee, a focus on relevance has led to curriculum inequity,
where only advantaged pupils get the chance to read texts that are
distanced from their reality. [footnote 246] This has led to the narrowing of the
literature curriculum for some groups of pupils, who only access texts that
reflect their own lives rather than different times or settings. Some types of
literature can provide knowledge of other times and places that, in turn,
helps pupils to comprehend texts. Additionally, reading more literature from
other times, places and cultures can enable pupils to both develop and
expand what they might consider meaningful to them.
A range of perspectives
Teachers and critics advocate a greater range of perspectives in the choices
of literature that pupils study. [footnote 247] It is beneficial for pupils to see
people similar to them represented as the heroes and protagonists in the
books they read.
However, ideas about writers' intentions can be over-simplified if they are
viewed solely through the prism of our current political landscape or
contemporary issues. This can also lead to reductionist interpretations:
readings that fail to do justice to the many layers within the text and their
meanings. It can also lead to significant, influential texts being removed
from the curriculum or texts being included only because they address
contemporary issues rather than due to literary merit.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-engish/curiculum-research-review-series-english.
44/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
Within the aims of the national curriculum, any rationale for choosing texts
should be based on the knowledge, practices and traditions of the subject
itself. Other purposes, for example learning about a particular contemporary
social issue, such as 'homelessness' or 'social media shaming', should take
a back seat to literary merit.
It may be useful for teachers and leaders to develop a set of criteria for
choosing texts. Didau suggests questions to consider when choosing a text
that include notions such as:
[footnote 248]
an entitlement to read certain texts
whether texts have been read already
the extent to which texts introduce pupils to new knowledge
whether the text offers a genuine variety of voices and perspectives
(including older, less popular voices)
whether the text has 'conversations' backwards and forwards with other
texts
Based on the above, high-quality English may have the following
features:
The curriculum has been designed to develop in pupils a genuine
love of literature, and an ability to respond to texts personally.
The curriculum has been designed to enable pupils to deepen their
understanding in the 4 domains or fields of knowledge in literature,
and to apply the key concepts from each field using disciplinary
methods in their writing.
The curriculum includes a range of ambitious whole texts in different
forms and genres, which have been carefully chosen using subject-
specific criteria.
Over time, teachers build pupils' 'readiness' for future encounters with
texts and critical views. They do this in a meaningful way so as not to
narrow the literature curriculum.
Teachers introduce pupils to texts that they would not choose to read
for themselves, especially from other times and places and with a
range of perspectives.
Assessment
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
45/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
Summary
This section outlines how formative assessment can allow teachers to
assess pupils' knowledge and plan next steps. Feedback should be
specific, challenging and related to the learning goals. Success criteria
can be useful but do have their pitfalls. Similarly, problems can arise
when mark schemes designed for summative assessment are used in
place of a curriculum that identifies the range of knowledge pupils need
for success in each written task. Multi-tiered systems can assess
difficulties that pupils have with reading.
Formative assessment
Large-scale reviews of research have noted the positive impact of formative
assessment on pupils' achievement across several subjects and for all
[footnote 249
ages.
Formative assessment provides feedback for both
teachers and pupils that can then be used to improve teaching and learning.
[footnote 250] Formative assessment tasks can also be used to improve pupils'
retention of the content through low-stakes assessment of knowledge and
retrieval tasks.
Effective feedback for teachers
Effective formative assessment will allow the teacher to identify gaps in
pupils' component knowledge and adjust the curriculum and pedagogy to
take account of these. However, grade descriptors created for summative
purposes may not function effectively to provide formative feedback for
teachers. For example, grade descriptors probably will not allow the teacher
to assess whether pupils had the specific knowledge of vocabulary and
context that would allow them to comprehend a text.
[footnote 251]
More useful formative tasks could ask pupils a series of questions on a
particular section or aspect of a text or include specific practice activities,
focused on areas where pupils need to improve, such as specific spellings
or learning to use particular punctuation, embed a quotation or conclude an
essay. The narrow focus in these tasks means that the teacher can identify
precise knowledge gaps and misapprehensions.
Effective feedback for pupils
A meta-analysis of studies investigating the impact of formative
assessments of writing directly tied to classroom teaching and learning
found that adult feedback and self-assessment had the greatest impact on
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-english
46/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
writing quality.
[footnote 252]
Older pupils' retention of new content can improve
from marking and correcting their own work. [footnote 253] Teachers may need
to help pupils with self-assessment, including understanding scoring rubrics
and knowing how to assess their work against the aims of that work.
[footnote
254]
Although feedback can have a positive influence on pupils' learning, it is
challenging to establish the right conditions, and its impact varies widely,
based on its form and purpose. [footnote 255] To be useful, it needs to be 'a
recipe for future action'. [footnote 256] Pupils also benefit from modelling and
feedback that is specific rather than general, such as 'Can you add the key
terms "anaphora" and "hyperbole" to your response?' instead of 'You need
to use more sophisticated vocabulary'.
Large-scale studies indicate that feedback is most effective when pupils do
a focused task and the feedback is specific, challenging and related to the
goal of the task. [footnote 257] These studies also show that the more
information teachers give, the more effective it is. This includes information
at task and process level. The large effect of this type of feedback suggests
that it is most beneficial when it helps pupils not only to understand their
mistakes but also to know why they made them and how to avoid them in
the future.
[footnote 258]
Research suggests that feedback should be immediate and precise when
pupils are learning new knowledge and skills in order to prevent them from
making errors and developing misconceptions.
[footnote 259]
For example,
when pupils are learning how to embed examples in text through practice
activities, teachers should give them instant verbal feedback that focuses on
accuracy.
There is research that suggests that later, when pupils are applying what
they have learned, delaying feedback might be more effective.
footnote 260]
This is because delayed and less frequent feedback will improve long-term
retention more than regular and instant feedback. Additionally, if pupils are
given feedback too frequently, they can become too dependent on it and
may then struggle to work independently when required to do so.
footnote 261]
There is an important balance to be drawn here: the immediacy and
frequency of feedback should be dependent on the stage of instruction and
the pupil's level of expertise.
Success criteria
Sharing learning intentions and success criteria are common ways that
teachers draw pupils' attention to what they need to learn. For example, if
pupils are learning to punctuate direct speech, it is useful if they know what
they should be able to do by the end of the lesson. It is helpful to use a
worked example to draw attention to specific features before using those
features as success criteria for pupils' own writing. For example, teachers
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
47/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
could discuss the features of a persuasive letter, before using those
features as success criteria for pupils' own writing.
However, there are a number of possible pitfalls when using success
criteria. It can be unhelpful to give different pupils in the class different
success criteria. This may result in pupils doing different tasks that require
them to have been previously taught different component knowledge. This
in-class differentiation has also generally not been shown to have much
impact on pupils' attainment.
[footnote 262]
Pupils need to understand the success criteria used to judge their work, but
this can be problematic. Some approaches that are designed to avoid this
problem, such as extended writing, can 'oversimplify the complexity of a
good piece of writing' [footnote 263] Marshall and Wiliam argue that this runs
the risk of pupils following a rule or formula at the expense of meaning and
writing becoming formulaic. Similarly, a learning intention such as 'To use
the features of an effective story opening' is likely to be too broad for pupils
to understand what a successful opening might look like. Success criteria
amount to maxims that can only make sense to pupils who have enough
expertise to appreciate how they can be applied.
Teachers and pupils might 'co-construct' success criteria derived from
worked examples. However, this is not entirely straightforward. Since the
teacher knows more about the subject than the pupils, the teacher would be
abdicating their responsibilities to 'let whatever the students feel should be
valued be adopted as learning intentions'.
[footnote 264]
Alternatives to written feedback and marking
Written feedback can be time-consuming for teachers. There is also a risk
that the pupils might not read feedback, or that they might not be able to
understand it or act on it independently.
[footnote 265]
Oral feedback is an effective alternative. For example, the teacher might
note gaps or common errors in pupils' work and then give feedback to the
whole class. Models of excellent work can form a basis for feedback,
particularly when a teacher highlights the successful aspects.
[footnote 266]
Research suggests that worked examples can be effective when pupils face
a complex task, reducing the cognitive load for them. [footnote
267]
Assessment of learning: summative assessment
Internal summative assessments allow schools to measure standards, see
how effective teaching and the curriculum are across year groups, report to
parents, and monitor pupils' progress and wider outcomes. It is crucial that
schools are aware of the limits to the inferences that can be drawn from
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publicatons/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-reviewseries-englisht
48/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
summative assessments, which check performance in complex tasks rather
than the component knowledge necessary for success.
Reliability and validity of summative assessment of writing
Summative assessment of extended writing presents significant challenges.
Research from Ofqual showed the difficulty of examiners reaching reliable
judgements for GCSE and A-level English. [footnote 268] These issues apply
more broadly, including to the assessment of writing at the end of key stage
2.
[footnote 269]
The limits to the reliability of assessing writing in English
suggest that data generated through internal school assessments to 'track
progress' and attainment may be of limited use. The Teacher Workload
Advisory Group recommended that attainment data should be collected no
more than 2 or 3 times a year unless it could be collected without additional
workload and with a clear rationale for doing so.
[footnote 270]
The validity of assessment is an issue when using criterion-referenced
assessments, where writing is assessed against a set of criteria describing
particular levels of performance. Scoring rubrics with lists of criteria can be
limiting, effectively narrowing the concept of quality and excluding legitimate
responses that fall outside the descriptors.
[footnote 271]
Comparative judgement is an emerging approach to assessing writing,
which research suggests can result in higher reliability than traditional
criteria-based marking.
[footnote 272]
It can reduce the limiting effects of mark
schemes and encourage expert markers to make decisions based on
multiple and complex aspects of quality, which avoids some of the issues of
using criteria.
[footnote 273]
Problems with using mark scheme criteria as a progression model
Progression in English, as outlined in the curriculum section, depends on far
more than just knowing how to approach test or examination questions.
Mark scheme levels typically describe differences in the quality of final
written outcomes that pupils produce. Mark schemes do not identify the
range of curriculum content that pupils need to learn incrementally to
succeed in the specific written tasks they are set. Therefore, treating
examination mark schemes as the curriculum for pupils to master (that is,
as a 'progression model') will mean that pupils may not acquire the very
prior knowledge they need for final summative assessments.
Assessing reading
Word reading (decoding) and comprehension, the 2 aspects of reading
discussed earlier (in 'The early English curriculum in schools' section)
require different types of assessment to ensure validity.
Pupils' reading may be assessed through available standardised tests.
However, these are not necessarily as effective as diagnostic tools.
[footnote
274] One implication that the importance of prior knowledge has for reading
comprehension assessments is that pupils' background knowledge of the
topic being tested can vary and this can affect scores. This is because
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-english
49/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
pupils' relevant prior knowledge is the most significant factor in successful
reading comprehension. Difficulties with decoding are another possible
explanation of why pupils might struggle to read a text. Standardised tests
do not generally identify the reasons for pupils' reading difficulties.
Reading difficulties often go undiagnosed in primary and secondary
schools, and around 20% of pupils start secondary school with reading skills
that are below the expected standard. [footnote 275] One study found that a
substantial proportion of pupils that the researchers identified as being poor
readers were not receiving extra support for reading in school.
[footnote 276]
Standardised tests of comprehension may be useful in secondary schools
for initially identifying reading difficulties, particularly as part of a multi-tiered
system of reading assessment. Teachers can first identify pupils who may
be struggling through a general reading test and then move onto further
one-to-one diagnostic testing to identify specific gaps or issues. Pupils may
have poor word reading and/or deficits in comprehension skills.
[footnote 277
It
must be clear which aspect of reading is to be assessed, so that any test
provides valid information about this.
footnote 278]
Based on the above, high-quality English may have the following
features:
The curriculum breaks learning down into component parts, which are
assessed formatively. This enables teachers to identify precisely
pupils' misconceptions, gaps and errors. Teachers use information
from this assessment to adapt the curriculum.
Feedback to pupils is specific and provides them with a 'recipe for
future action'.
Low-stakes assessment of knowledge and retrieval tasks are also
used to improve pupils' retention of the content.
A multi-tiered approach to assessing reading problems leads to
accurate identification and diagnosis of difficulties and pupils receive
targeted support.
Teaching focuses on building pupils' prerequisite knowledge rather
than on practice for answering examination questions.
Systems at subject and school level
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-reviewseries-englisht
50/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
Summary
The leadership roles of senior and middle leaders in primary schools are
critical in ensuring that all pupils learn to read. Teachers' content
knowledge in English is fundamental to pupils' progress. Continuing
professional development (CPD) should be relevant to teachers' specific
needs and capabilities, but it must also ensure that they understand the
rationale for what they are being asked to learn.
Leadership
Leadership of English begins with primary school headteachers making
sure that the youngest pupils grasp the basic knowledge and skills of
reading. This will include a complete programme for, and resources to
support, the teaching of systematic synthetic phonics.
Senior leaders cannot, of course, be expert in every aspect of curriculum.
[footnote 279]
Middle leaders - subject leads in primary schools and heads of
department in secondary schools - therefore play an important role in
ensuring positive outcomes for pupils and developing the knowledge and
practice of other teachers. [footnote 280] However, their effectiveness depends
on their knowledge of the subject and of effective pedagogy, and the extent
to which they have autonomy and control over the curriculum, drawing on
their subject expertise. [footnote 281] Senior leaders need to give them this
autonomy as part of the school's shared vision and accountability
framework for English.
[footnote 282]
Continuing professional development
A study by Coe and others reviewed existing research and identified 4
'dimensions' that teachers need in order to understand the content of a
subject and how it is learned:
[footnote 283]
deep and fluent knowledge and flexible understanding of the content you
are teaching
knowing the requirements of curriculum sequencing and dependencies in
relation to the content and ideas you are teaching
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curicuum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-english
51/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
knowing the relevant curriculum tasks, assessments and activities
knowing pupils' misconceptions and sticking points
Teachers' professional learning is most effective when the content and the
activities are directed towards the needs and existing capabilities of
teachers.
[footnote 284]
There is some evidence that a fortnightly to monthly rhythm of CPD
sessions and/or support may be most effective in improving teachers'
knowledge.
[footnote 285]
Based on the above, high-quality English may have the following
features:
In the early years and key stage 1, leaders prioritise the expert
teaching of systematic synthetic phonics.
Regular, subject-specific CPD focuses on improving disciplinary and
pedagogical content knowledge.
Conclusion
This review shows how curriculum content and sequencing, as well as
subject-specific pedagogy, best enable pupils to achieve the national
curriculum aims for English. Our review has identified some themes that
relate to an effective English curriculum.
Strong foundational knowledge for reading, writing
and spoken language are essential aspects of the early
years curriculum
Automaticity in the basics of reading and writing early on enables pupils to
rise to the challenges of an ambitious curriculum. It is critical that young
children achieve both accuracy and speed in reading. Effective
communication through writing depends on younger pupils developing
foundational transcription skills (spelling and handwriting). Alongside this,
they should develop knowledge of the world around them from stories and
talking with adults. For both reading and writing, repeated practice is key to
gaining proficiency.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculun-research-review-series-engish
52/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
Vocabulary is fundamental to pupils' progress
Vocabulary is the foundational knowledge for reading, speech and writing.
Narrowing the word gap between pupils who are word-rich and word-poor is
vital. Vocabulary development and wider language development feed into
reading and writing. Adults' engagement in dialogue with young children
supports their language development. Sharing books and stories introduces
not only a wider, deeper range of vocabulary than is found in speech, but
also shows how the meaning of words is context-dependent.
An effective reading curriculum ensures that pupils
read large amounts of text and it focuses on providing
pupils with the knowledge they need for
comprehension
Once pupils have secured the basics of reading, they can develop skilled
reading through a curriculum that includes exposure to large amounts of
text and progressively more complex text. Teachers explicitly introduce the
specific knowledge to pupils needed for comprehension. Over-simplistic
approaches to reading (such as comprehension skills like summarising,
drawing inferences or making predictions) do not work in isolation.
There can be unhelpful confusion about the term 'background knowledge'. It
is often used quite narrowly and excludes vital syntactical lexical and literary
knowledge. Research suggests that 'explicitly teaching background
knowledge should be considered foundational to increasing competency in
reading'.
footnote 286]
Pupils benefit from exposure to background knowledge
in a specific and sequenced way.
A reading curriculum is supported by the careful
choice of increasingly challenging texts
The focus on literature-rich texts in the curriculum starts with sharing stories
and rhymes at home before children start school. Throughout the
curriculum, the choice of texts studied is critically important. An effective
English curriculum will feature increasingly challenging texts at each stage.
Different factors contribute to the challenge of a text. A clear understanding
of this enables the construction of a curriculum that builds readiness for
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
53/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
future reading. Pupils are likely to benefit from opportunities to read whole
texts.
Carefully selected knowledge of literary studies is needed for pupils to make
meaningful interpretations in keeping with the disciplinary tradition of
literature. In a strong literature curriculum, this knowledge will be skilfully
combined with aesthetic, epistemic and contextual knowledge.
The English curriculum for novices is structured
differently in many aspects from the curriculum for
experts
Different approaches to teaching may be more or less appropriate
depending on pupils' level of expertise. Novices are likely to learn more
effectively through direct instruction where they are 'explicitly shown what to
do and how to do it'. Once they have gained this knowledge, they can apply
it to future tasks.
Finally, teachers should be aware that novices may be less able to
successfully produce their own meaningful responses without guidance.
Securing foundational knowledge is a prerequisite. Once secure, teachers
should carefully design more complex tasks so that pupils can attempt
these successfully and without developing misconceptions. There is strong
evidence for the value of using worked examples with novice learners. The
idea of scaffolding has also been proven to guide instruction and reduce
cognitive load.
1. 'The national curriculum in England: framework document'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-england-
framework-for-key-stages-1-to-4), Department for Education, September
2013.
2. 'Principles behind Ofsted's research reviews and subject reports'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/principles-behind-ofsteds-research-
reviews-and-subject-reports), Ofsted, March 2021.
3. 'Education inspection framework: overview of research'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/education-inspection-framework-
overview-of-research), Ofsted, January 2019; 'Commentary on curriculum
research - phase 3' https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/commentary-
on-curriculum-research-phase-3), Ofsted, December 2018.
4. Education Act 2002 (https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2002/32/section/78),
section 78.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-review-series-english
54/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
5. Academies Act 2010 (https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/32/section/1),
section 1.
6. J McGrane, J Stiff, J-A Baird, J Lenkit and T Hopfenbeck, 'Progress in
international reading literacy study (PIRLS) 2016: national report for
England' (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/pirls-2016-reading-
literacy-performance-in-england), December 2017; J Sizmur, R Ager, J
Bradshaw, R Classick, M Galvis and others, 'Achievement of 15-year-olds
in England: PISA 2018 results' (https://www.nfer.ac.uk/achievement-of-15-
year-old-pupils-in-england-pisa-2018-national-report/), National Foundation for
Education Research, December 2019, pages 1 to 7.
7. 'Early years foundation stage profile results in England 2019'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/early-years-foundation-stage-profile-
results-2017-to-2018), Department for Education, October 2019.
8. Comparing pupils who took the check at the end of Year 1 in 2012 with
those who took it at the end of Year 1 in 2019.
9. 'Phonics screening check and key stage 1 assessments in England,
2019' htps://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/phonics-screening-check-and-
key-stage-1-assessments-england-2019), Department for Education,
September 2019.
10. 'An infographic: GCSEs in 2019'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/infographic-gcse-results-2019),
Ofqual, August 2019.
11. 'Ad-hoc notice: early entry into GCSE exams in England'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/early-entry-into-gcse-exams-in-
england), Department for Education, November 2020.
12. D Thomson, 'GCSE results 2019: to what extent are schools entering
pupils early?' (https://ffteducationdatalab.org.uk/2019/08/gcse-results-2019-to-
what-extent-are-schools-entering-pupils-early/), FFT Education Datalab,
August 2019.
13. 'A level English entry and achievement, 2017-2019'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/statistics-attainment-at-19-years),
Department for Education, 2019.
14. 'The framework for the national curriculum. A report by the expert panel
for the national curriculum review'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/framework-for-the-national-
curriculum-a-report-by-the-expert-panel-for-the-national-curriculum-review),
Department for Education, December 2011, page 12.
15. 'The framework for the national curriculum. A report by the expert panel
for the national curriculum review'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/framework-for-the-national-
curriculum-a-report-by-the-expert-panel-for-the-national-curriculum-review),
Department for Education, December 2011, page 11.
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
55/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
16. 'Learning with understanding: seven principles'
(http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record id=10129&page=117), in 'Learning
and understanding: improving advanced study of mathematics and
science in U.S. high schools', edited by J Gollub and others, National
Academy of Sciences, 2002, pages 117 to 133; 'How people learn: brain,
mind, experience, and school', edited by JD Bransford, AL Brown and RR
Cocking, National Academy Press, 2000.
17. c Howe and N Mercer, 'Children's social development, peer interaction
and classroom learning', in 'Primary Review Research Survey 2/1b',
University of Cambridge, Faculty of Education, 2007; C Howe and M
Abedin, 'Classroom dialogue: a systematic review across four decades of
research', in 'Cambridge Journal of Education', Volume 43, Issue 3, 2013,
pages 325 to 356.
18. 'Why closing the word gap matters: Oxford language report overview'
(https://global.oup.com/education/content/dictionaries/key-issues/word-gap/?
region=uk&utm_medium=blog&utm_source=buddy-
ite&utm_team=digital&utm_campaign=WordGap2018&utm_brand=literacy&utm
content=report&_ga=2.112852996.1827914339.1652085786
1862392565.1643732754), Oxford University Press, 2018.
19. B Hart and TR Risley, 'Meaningful differences in the everyday experience
of young American children', Paul H Brookes Publishing, 1995.
20. J Gilkerson, JA Richards, SF Warren, JK Montgomery, CR Greenwood, D
Kimbrough Oller, J Hansen and TD Paul, 'Mapping the early language
environment using all-day recordings and automated analysis', in
'American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology', Volume 26, Issue 2,
2017, pages 248 to 265; DE Sperry, LL Sperry and PJ Miller,
'Reexamining the verbal environments of children from different
socioeconomic backgrounds', in 'Child Development, Volume 90, 2019,
pages 1,303 to 1,318; J Gilkerson, JA Richards, SF Warren, JK
Montgomery, CR Greenwood, D Kimbrough Oller, J Hansen and TD Paul,
'Mapping the early language environment using all-day recordings and
automated analysis', in 'American Journal of Speech-Language
Pathology', Volume 26, Issue 2, 2017, pages 248 to 265.
21. J Oakhill, K Cain and C Elbro, Understanding and teaching reading
comprehension: a handbook', Routledge, 2014.
22. J Milton and J Treffers-Daller, Vocabulary size revisited: the link between
vocabulary size and academic achievement'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/better-communication-research-
programme-2nd-interim-report), in 'Applied Linguistics Review', Volume 4,
Issue 1, 2013, pages 151 to 172; MJ Snowling, C Hulme, AM Bailey, S
Stothard and G Lindsay, 'Language and literacy attainment of pupils
during early years and through key stage 2: does teacher assessment at
five provide a valid measure of children's current and future educational
attainments?', Better Communication Research Programme, Department
for Education, November 2011.
htps://wwwgov.ugovernment/publications/curriculum-researchreviewseries-english/curiculun-research-review-series-englisfh
56/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
23. ED Hirsch, 'A wealth of words', in 'City Journal', Volume 23, Issue 1,
2013.
24. R Smith, P Snow, T Serry and L Hammond, 'The role of background
knowledge in reading comprehension: a critical review', in 'Reading
Psychology', Volume 42, 2021, pages 214 to 240, quote on page 233.
25. R Smith, P Snow, T Serry and L Hammond, 'The role of background
knowledge in reading comprehension: a critical review', in 'Reading
Psychology', Volume 42, 2021, pages 214 to 240, quote on page 233.
26. 'Why closing the word gap matters: Oxford language report overview'
(https://global.oup.com/education/content/dictionaries/key-issues/word-gap/?
region=uk&utm_medium=blog&utm_source=buddy-
site&utm team=digital&utm campaign=WordGap2018&utm brand=literacy&utm,
content=report&_ga=2.112852996.1827914339.1652085786-
1862392565.1643732754), Oxford University Press, 2018.
27. J Law, J Charlton and K Asmussen, 'Language as a child wellbeing
indicator' (https://www.eif.org.uk/report/language-as-a-child-wellbeing-indicator),
Early Intervention Foundation and Newcastle University, September
2017.
28. M Snowling and C Hulme, 'Language skills, learning to read and reading
intervention', in 'London Review of Education', Volume 4, Issue 1, 2006,
pages 63 to 76.
29. S Spencer, J Clegg, J Stackhouse and R Rush, 'Contribution of spoken
language and socio-economic background to adolescents' educational
achievement at age 16 years', in 'International Journal of Language &
Communication Disorders', Volume 52, Issue 2, 2017, pages 184 to 196.
30. J Gilkerson, JA Richards, SF Warren, JK Montgomery, CR Greenwood, D
Kimbrough Oller, J Hansen and TD Paul, 'Mapping the early language
environment using all-day recordings and automated analysis', in
'American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology', Volume 26, Issue 2,
2017, pages 248 to 265; M Rowe, 'Child-directed speech: relation to
socioeconomic status, knowledge of child development and child
vocabulary skill', in 'Journal of Child Language', Volume 35, Issue 1,
2008, pages 185 to 205.
31. ED Hirsch, 'Reading comprehension requires knowledge - of words and
the world' (https://www.aft.org/periodical/american-educator/spring-
2003/reading-comprehension-requires-knowledge-words) in 'American
Educator', 2003, pages 10 to 45.
32. KE Stanovich, 'Matthew effects in reading: some consequences of
individual differences in the acquisition of literacy', in 'Reading Research
Quarterly', Volume 22, 1986, pages 360 to 407.
33. ED Hirsch, 'Reading comprehension requires knowledge - of words and
the world' (https://www.aft.org/periodical/american-educator/spring-
2003/reading-comprehension-requires-knowledge-words). in 'American
Educator', 2003, pages 10 to 45.
htps://www.gov.u/govenment/publications/curicuum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
57/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
34. WA Hoover and WE Tunmer, 'The primacy of science in communicating
advances in the science of reading', in 'Reading Research Quarterly',
2021, pages 1 to 10.
35. P Gough and W Tunmer, 'Decoding, reading, and reading disability', in
'Remedial and Special Education', Volume 7, Issue 1, 1986, pages 6 to
10.
36. 'The national curriculum in England: framework document'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curiculum-in-england-
framework-for-key-stages-1-to-4), Department for Education, September
2013, page 15.
37. 'The national curriculum in England: framework document'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-england-
framework-for-key-stages-1-to-4), Department for Education, September
2013.
38. 'Education inspection framework: overview of research'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/education-inspection-framework-
overview-of-research), Ofsted, January 2019; 'Commentary on curriculum
research - phase 3' (https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/commentary-
on-curriculum-research-phase-3), Ofsted, December 2018, page 27.
39. T Shanahan, 'The national reading panel report. Practical advice for
teachers' (http://eric.ed.gov/ERCWebPortal/recordDetail?accno=ED489535),
Learning Point Associates/North Central Regional Educational
Laboratory, 2005.
40. 'The reading framework: teaching the foundations of literacy'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-reading-framework-teaching-the-
foundations-of-literacy), Department for Education, July 2021.
41. 'Education inspection framework: overview of research'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/education-inspection-framework-
overview-of-research), Ofsted, January 2019; 'Commentary on curriculum
research - phase 3' (https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/commentary-
on-curriculum-research-phase-3), Ofsted, December 2018, pages 25-26.
42. 'Report of the national reading panel: teaching children to read'
(https://www.nichd.nih.gov/publications/pubs/nrp/smallbook). National Reading
Panel, 2000.
43. T Shanahan, 'The national reading panel report. Practical advice for
teachers' (http://eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/recordDetail?accno=ED489535),
Learning Point Associates/North Central Regional Educational
Laboratory, 2005.
44. Y Petscher and others, 'How the science of reading informs 21st century
education' (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8128160/), in
'Reading Research Quarterly, Volume 55, Issue 1, 2020, pages 1 to 25.
45. 'Education inspection framework: overview of research'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/education-inspection-framework-
htps://wwwgov.u/government/publications/curicuum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
58/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
overview-of-research), Ofsted, January 2019.
46. T Shanahan, 'The national reading panel report. Practical advice for
teachers' (http://eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/recordDetail?accno=ED489535),
Learning Point Associates/North Central Regional Educational
Laboratory, 2005.
47. T Shanahan, 'The national reading panel report. Practical advice for
teachers' (http://eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/recordDetail?accno=ED489535),
Learning Point Associates/North Central Regional Educational
Laboratory, 2005, page 9.
48. JL Anthony and DJ Francis, 'Development of phonological awareness', in
'Current Directions in Psychological Science', Volume 14, Issue 5, 2005,
pages 255 to 259.
49. T Shanahan, 'The national reading panel report. Practical advice for
teachers' (http://eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/recordDetail?accno=ED489535),
Learning Point Associates/North Central Regional Educational
Laboratory, 2005; LC Ehri, SR Nunes, DM Willows, B Valeska Schuster, Z
Yaghoub-Zadeh and others, 'Phonemic awareness instruction helps
children learn to read: evidence from the national reading panel's meta-
analysis', in 'Reading Research Quarterly', Volume 36, Issue 3, 2001,
pages 250 to 287.
50. LC Ehri, SR Nunes, DM Willows, B Valeska Schuster, Z Yaghoub-Zadeh
and others, 'Phonemic awareness instruction helps children learn to read:
evidence from the national reading panel's meta-analysis'
(htps://www.nichd.nih.gov/publications/pubs/nrp/smallbook) in 'Reading
Research Quarterly', Volume 36, Issue 3, 2001, pages 250 to 287;
'Report of the national reading panel: teaching children to read', National
Reading Panel, 2000.
51. 'Foundational skills to support reading for understanding in kindergarten
through 3rd grade', What Works Clearinghouse, 2016.
52. 'The reading framework: teaching the foundations of literacy'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-reading-framework-teaching-the-
foundations-of-literacy), Department for Education, July 2021, page 66.
53. 'The national curriculum in England: framework document'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-england-
framework-for-key-stages-1-to-4), Department for Education, September
2013, page 20.
54. 'Foundational skills to support reading for understanding in kindergarten
through 3rd grade', What Works Clearinghouse, 2016, page 2.
55. Y Petscher and others, 'How the science of reading informs 21st century
education' (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8128160/),i in
'Reading Research Quarterly, Volume 55, Issue 1, 2020, pages 1 to 25,
quote on page 10; A Castles, K Rastle and K Nation, 'Ending the reading
wars: reading acquisition from novice to expert'
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-review-series-english
59/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
(https://doi.org/10.1177/1529100618772271), in 'Psychological Science in the
Public Interest', Volume 19, Issue 1, 2018, pages 5 to 51.
56. JP Cheatham and JH Allor, 'The influence of decodability in early reading
text on reading achievement: a review of the evidence', in 'Reading and
Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal', Volume 25, Issue 9, 2012, pages
2,223 to 2,246.
57. JP Cheatham and JH Allor, 'The influence of decodability in early reading
text on reading achievement: a review of the evidence', in 'Reading and
Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal', Volume 25, Issue 9, 2012, pages
2,223 to 2,246, quote on page 2,241.
58. Y Petscher and others, 'How the science of reading informs 21st century
education' (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8128160/), i in
'Reading Research Quarterly, Volume 55, Issue 1, 2020, pages 1 to 25.
59. KS Double, JA McGrane, JC Stiff and TN Hopfenbeck, 'The importance of
early phonics improvements for predicting later reading comprehension',
in 'British Educational Research Journal', Volume 45, Issue 6, 2019,
pages 1,220 to 1,234.
60. 'National curriculum in England: primary curriculum'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-england-
primary-curriculum), Department for Education, September 2013, page 20.
61. ED Hirsch, 'Reading comprehension requires knowledge - of words and
the world' (https://www.aft.org/periodical/american-educator/spring-
2003/reading-comprehension-requires-knowledge-words) in 'American
Educator', 2003, page 12.
62. 'Early adopter schools: EYFS profile handbook'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/early-adopter-schools-eyfs-profile-
handbook), Department for Education, July 2020.
63. RT Kellogg, 'Training writing skills: a cognitive developmental
perspective', in 'Journal of Writing Research', Volume 1, Issue 1, 2008,
pages 1 to 26.
64. 'The national curriculum in England: framework document'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curiculum-in-england-
framework-for-key-stages-1-to-4), Department for Education, September
2013.
65. J Rose, 'Independent review of the teaching of early reading: final report',
Department for Education and Skills, 2006.
66. 'National curriculum in England: English programmes of study'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-england-
english-programmes-of-study), Department for Education, September 2013.
67. CE Snow, P Griffin and MS Burns, 'Students change: what are teachers
to learn about reading development?', in 'Knowledge to support the
teaching of reading: preparing teachers for a changing world', edited by
https://wwwgov.uk/govenment/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-reviewseries-englisht
60/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
CE Snow, P Griffin and MS Burns, Wiley, 2005, pages 15 to 122, quote
on page 86.
68. Development matters: non-statutory curriculum guidance for the early
years foundation stage'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/development-matters-2),
Department for Education, March 2017.
69. 'National curriculum in England: English programmes of study'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-england-
english-programmes-of-study), Department for Education, September 2013,
page 13.
70. 'National curriculum in England: English programmes of study'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-england-
english-programmes-of-study), Department for Education, September 2013,
pages 28 and 34.
71. C Binder, 'Behavioral fluency: evolution of a new paradigm', in 'The
behavior analyst', Volume 19, Issue 2, pages 163 to 197.
72. 'Early adopter schools: EYFS profile handbook'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/early-adopter-schools-eyfs-profile-
handbook), Department for Education, July 2020, page 12.
73. 'The national curriculum in England: framework document'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-england-
framework-for-key-stages-1-to-4), Department for Education, September
2013, page 28.
74. K James and L Engelhardt, 'The effects of handwriting experience on
functional brain development in pre-literate children', in 'Trends in
Neuroscience and Education', Volume 1, Issue 1, December 2012, pages
32 to 42.
75. C Binder, 'Behavioral fluency: evolution of a new paradigm', in 'The
behavior analyst', Volume 19, Issue 2, pages 163 to 197, quote on page
173.
76. T Santangelo and S Graham, 'A comprehensive meta-analysis of
handwriting instruction', in 'Educational Psychology Review', Volume 28,
2016, pages 225 to 265; S Graham, KR Harris and T Santangelo,
'Research-based writing practices and the common core: meta analysis
and meta synthesis', in 'The Elementary School Journal', Volume 115,
Issue 4, 2015, pages 498 to 522.
77. MJ Snowling, C Hulme, AM Bailey, S Stothard and G Lindsay, 'Language
and literacy attainment of pupils during early years and through key stage
2: does teacher assessment at five provide a valid measure of children's
current and future educational attainments?'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/beter-communication-research-
programme-2nd-interim-report), Better Communication Research
Programme, Department for Education, November 2011; J Gross, 'The
contribution of oral language skills to school improvement and outcomes
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-review-series-englisha
61/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English GOV.UK
for children and young people', Office of the Communication Champion,
2011; c Howe and N Mercer, 'Children's social development, peer
interaction and classroom learning', in 'Primary Review Research Survey
2/1b', University of Cambridge, Faculty of Education, 2007; H Shablack
and KA Lindquist, 'The role of language in emotional development, in
'Handbook of emotional development' edited by V LoBue, K Pérez-Edgar
and K Buss, Springer, 2019; SGK Yew and R O'Kearney, 'Emotional and
behavioural outcomes later in childhood and adolescence for children
with specific language impairments: meta-analyses of controlled
prospective studies', in 'Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and
Allied Disciplines', Volume 54, 2013, pages 516 to 524.
78. J Law, R Rush, I Schoon and S Parsons, 'Modelling developmental
language difficulties from school entry into adulthood: literacy, mental
health, and employment outcomes', in 'Journal of Speech, Language and
Hearing Research', Volume 52, 2009, pages 1,401 to 1,416.
79. R Alexander, 'Improving oracy and classroom talk in English school:
achievements and challenges', University of Cambridge, Faculty of
Education, 2012.
80. C Howe and N Mercer, 'Children's social development, peer interaction
and classroom learning', in 'Primary Review Research Survey 2/1b',
University of Cambridge, Faculty of Education, 2007.
81. RJ Alexander, 'Improving oracy and classroom talk: achievements and
challenges', in 'Primary First', Volume 10, 2013, pages 22 to 29; W
Millard and L Menzies, 'Oracy in our schools', in 'Voice 21', 2016, pages 1
to 90.
82. N Mercer, P Warwick and A Ahmed, 'An oracy assessment toolkit: linking
research and development in the assessment of students' spoken
language skills at age 11-12', in 'Learning and Instruction', Volume 48,
2017, pages 51 to 60.
83. D Barnes, 'From communication to curriculum', Penguin, 1976; D Barnes,
'Exploratory talk for learning', in 'Exploring talk in school: inspired by the
work of Douglas Barnes', edited by N Mercer and S Hodgkinson, SAGE,
2008, pages 1 to 16.
84. RJ Alexander, 'Improving oracy and classroom talk: achievements and
challenges', in 'Primary First', Volume 10, 2013, pages 22 to 29.
85. C Howe and M Abedin, 'Classroom dialogue: a systematic review across
four decades of research', in 'Cambridge Journal of Education', Volume
43, 2013, pages 325 to 356.
86. IL Beck, MG McKeown and L Kucan, 'Bringing words to life: robust
vocabulary instruction', second edition, Guilford Press, 2013.
87. RJ Alexander, 'Improving oracy and classroom talk: achievements and
challenges', in 'Primary First', Volume 10, 2013, pages 22 to 29.
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
62/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
88. K Littleton and N Mercer, 'Interthinking: putting talk to work', Routledge,
2013.
89. D Barnes, 'From communication to curriculum', Penguin, 1976; D Barnes,
'Exploratory talk for learning', in 'Exploring talk in school: inspired by the
work of Douglas Barnes', edited by N Mercer and S Hodgkinson, SAGE,
2008, pages 1 to 16.
90. RJ Alexander, 'Improving oracy and classroom talk: achievements and
challenges', in 'Primary First', Volume 10, 2013, pages 22 to 29.
91. D Edwards and N Mercer, 'Common knowledge: the development of
understanding in the classroom', Methuen, 1987.
92. M Robinson, 'Trivium 21c: preparing young people for the future with
lessons from the past', Crown House Publishing, 2013.
93. C Perfetti and J Stafura, 'Word knowledge in a theory of reading
comprehension', in 'Scientific Studies of Reading', Volume 18, Issue 1,
2014, pages 22 to 37.
94. A Castles, K Rastle and K Nation, 'Ending the reading wars: reading
acquisition from novice to expert'
(https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1529100618772271), in 'Psychological Science in
the Public Interest', Volume 19, 2018, page 27.
95. HW Catts, SM Adlof and S Ellis Weismer, 'Language deficits in poor
comprehenders: a case for the simple view of reading', in 'Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research', Volume 49, Issue April,
2006, pages 278 to 293; CA Perfetti, N Landi and J Oakhill, 'The
acquisition of reading comprehension skill', in 'The science of reading: a
handbook', edited by M Snowling and C Hulme, Blackwell, 2005, pages
227 to 247.
96. A Castles, K Rastle and K Nation, 'Ending the reading wars: reading
acquisition from novice to expert'
(https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1529100618772271), in 'Psychological Science in
the Public Interest', Volume 19, 2018, quote on page 28.
97. CA Perfetti, N Landi and J Oakhill, 'The acquisition of reading
comprehension skill', in 'The science of reading: a handbook', edited by
M Snowling and c Hulme, Blackwell, 2005, pages 227 to 247.
98. A Castles, K Rastle and K Nation, 'Ending the reading wars: reading
acquisition from novice to expert', in 'Psychological Science in the Public
Interest', Volume 19, 2018, quote on page 27.
99. WH Rupley, WD Nichols, M Mraz and TR Blair, 'Building conceptual
understanding through vocabulary instruction', in 'Reading Horizons: A
Journal of Literacy and Language Arts', Volume 51, Issue 4, 2012, pages
299 to 312.
100. 'English programmes of study: key stage 4 national curriculum in
England' (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-english
63/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
england-english-programmes-of-study), Department for Education, July
2014.
101. DS McNamara, AC Graesser and MM Louwerse, 'Sources of text
difficulty: across genres and grades', in 'Measuring up: advances in how
to assess reading ability', edited by J Sabatini, E Albro and T O'Reilly,
Rowman & Littlefield Education, 2012, pages 3 to 20.
102. C Perfetti and J Stafura, 'Word knowledge in a theory of reading
comprehension', in 'Scientific Studies of Reading', Volume 18, Issue 1,
2014, pages 22 to 37.
103. GL Williamson, J Fitzgerald and AJ Stenner, 'The Common Core State
Standards' quantitative text complexity trajectory: figuring out how much
complexity is enough', Educational Researcher, Volume 42, Issue 2,
2013, pages 59 to 69.
104. N Duke and K Cartwright, 'The science of reading progresses:
communicating advances beyond the simple view of reading', in
'Reading Research Quarterly', Volume 56, 2021, pages 25 to 44.
105. DS McNamara, AC Graesser and MM Louwerse, 'Sources of text
difficulty: across genres and grades', in 'Measuring up: advances in how
to assess reading ability', edited by J Sabatini, E Albro and T O'Reilly,
Rowman & Littlefield Education, 2012, pages 3 to 20.
106. P Deane, J Sabatini, G Feng, J Sparks, Y Song and others, 'English
language arts: literacy in history/social studies, science, and technical
subjects key elements of the standards glossary of key terms', in 'ETS
Research Report Series', Volume 2015, Issue 2, 2015, pages 1 to 29.
107. D Lemov and E Badillo, 'On writing a knowledge-driven English
curriculum', in 'The researched guide to the curriculum', edited by C
Sealy, John Catt, 2020, pages 85 to 94.
108. D Lemov and E Badillo, 'On writing a knowledge-driven English
curriculum', in 'The researched guide to the curriculum', edited by c
Sealy, John Catt, 2020, pages 85 to 94.
109. P Deane, J Sabatini, G Feng, J Sparks, Y Song and others, 'English
language arts: literacy in history/social studies, science, and technical
subjects key elements of the standards glossary of key terms', in 'ETS
Research Report Series', Volume 2015, Issue 2, 2015, pages 1 to 29.
110. D Lemov, C Driggs and E Woolway, 'Reading reconsidered: a practical
guide to rigorous literacy instruction', Jossey-Bass, 2016.
111. R Smith, P Snow, T Serry and L Hammond, 'The role of background
knowledge in reading comprehension: a critical review', in 'Reading
Psychology', Volume 42, 2021, pages 214 to 240.
112. DD Paige, 'The importance of adolescent fluency', in 'Fluency
instruction: research-based best practices', edited by T Rasinski, C
Blachowicz and K Lems, second edition, Guilford Press, 2012, pages 55
to 71.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-review-series-englisa
64/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
113. MJ Adams, 'Advancing our students' language and literacy: the
challenge of complex texts', in 'American Educator', Volume 34, Issue 4,
2011, pages 3 to 11, quote on page 9.
114. D Lemov, c Driggs and E Woolway, 'Reading reconsidered: a practical
guide to rigorous literacy instruction', Jossey-Bass, 2016.
115. See, for example, IL Beck, L Kucan and MG McKeown, 'Bringing words
to life: robust vocabulary instruction', Guilford Publications, 2013; KE
Stanovich, 'Matthew Effects in reading: some consequences of
individual differences in the acquisition of literacy', in 'Reading Research
Quarterly', Volume 21, Issue 4, 1986, pages 360 to 407; C McBride-
Chang, 'Children's literacy development, Routledge, 2004; K Cain and J
Oakhill, 'Vocabulary development and reading comprehension: a
reciprocal relationship'
(https://global.oup.com/education/content/dictionaries/key-issues/word-gap/?
region=uk&utm_medium=blog&utm_source=buddy-
site&utm_team=digital&utm_campaign=WordGap2018&utm_brand=literacy&ut
n_content=report&_ga=2.14665399.1086976010.1651654472-
1862392565.1643732754), in 'Why closing the word gap matters', edited
by J Harley, Oxford University Press, 2018, page 17; M Snowling and c
Hulme, 'Language skills, learning to read and reading intervention', in
'London Review of Education Education', Volume 4, Issue 1, 2006,
pages 63 to 76.
116. D Hayes, 'Speaking and writing: distinct patterns of word choice', in
'Journal of Memory and Language', Volume 27, Issue 5, 1988, pages
572 to 585; N Dawson, Y Hsiao, AWM Tan, N Banerji and K Nation,
'Features of lexical richness in children's books: comparisons with child-
directed speech', Language Development Research, 2021.
117. J Montag and M MacDonald, 'Text exposure predicts spoken production
of complex sentences in 8- and 12-year-old children and adults', in
'Journal of Experimental Psychology: General', Volume 144, Issue 2,
2015, pages 447 to 468.
118. IL Beck, MG McKeown and L Kucan, 'Bringing words to life: robust
vocabulary instruction', second edition, Guilford Press, 2013; TS Wright
and GN Cervetti, 'A systematic review of the research on vocabulary
instruction that impacts text comprehension', in 'Reading Research
Quarterly', Volume 52, Issue 2, 2017, pages 203 to 226; S Butler, K
Urrutia, A Buenger, N Gonzalez, M Hunt and others, 'A review of the
current research on vocabulary instruction'
(http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary;jsessionid=1D67C9CFA50E0A53
DF06C6A33991A0D1?doi=10.1.1.696.523), National Reading Technical
Assistance Center, 2010.
119. IL Beck, MG McKeown and L Kucan, 'Bringing words to life: robust
vocabulary instruction', second edition, Guilford Press, 2013.
120. IL Beck, MG McKeown and L Kucan, 'Bringing words to life: robust
vocabulary instruction', second edition, Guilford Press, 2013.
htps://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-review-series-english
65/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
121. T Shanahan, 'The national reading panel report. Practical advice for
teachers' (http://eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/recordDetail?accno=ED489535),
Learning Point Associates/North Central Regional Educational
Laboratory, 2005.
122. M Joshi, R Treiman, S Carreker and LC Moats, 'How words cast their
spell: spelling is an integral part of learning the language, not a matter of
memorization', in 'American Educator', Volume Winter, 2008, pages 5 to
43.
123. K Rastle and M Davis, 'Morphological decomposition based on the
analysis of orthography', in 'Language and Cognitive Processes',
Volume 23, 2008, pages 942 to 971; VW Berninger, RD Abbott, W Nagy
and J Carlisle, 'Growth in phonological, orthographic, and morphological
awareness in grades 1 to 6', in 'Journal of Psycholinguistic Research',
Volume 39, Issue 2, 2010, pages 141 to 163.
124. E James, N Currie, SX Tong and K Cain, 'The relations between
morphological awareness and reading comprehension in beginner
readers to young adolescents', in 'Journal of Research in Reading',
Volume 44, 2021, pages 110 to 130; K Flanigan, S Templeton and L
Hayes, 'What's in a word? Using content vocabulary to generate growth
in general academic vocabulary knowledge', in 'Journal of Adolescent
and Adult Literacy', Volume 56, Issue 2, 2012, pages 132 to 140.
125. LC Moats, 'Teaching reading is rocket science: what expert teachers of
reading should know and be able to do'
(https://www.aft.org/ae/summer2020/moats), American Educator, 2020.
126. S Seok and B DaCosta, 'Oral reading fluency as a predictor of silent
reading fluency at secondary and postsecondary levels', in 'Journal of
Adolescent and Adult Literacy', Volume 58, Issue 2, 2014, pages 157 to
166.
127. K Cain, JV Oakhill and c Elbro, 'The ability to learn new word meanings
from context by school-age children with and without language
comprehension difficulties', in 'Journal of Child Language', Volume 30,
pages 681 to 694.
128. S Butler, K Urrutia, A Buenger, N Gonzalez, M Hunt and others, 'A
review of the current research on vocabulary instruction'
(http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary;jsessionid=1D67C9CFA50E0A53
DF06C6A33991A0D1?doi=10.1.1.696.523), National Reading Technical
Assistance Center, 2010.
129. S Butler, K Urrutia, A Buenger, N Gonzalez, M Hunt and others, 'A
review of the current research on vocabulary instruction'
(http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary;jsessionid=1D67C9CFA50E0A53
DF06C6A33991A0D1?doi=10.1.1.696.523), National Reading Technical
Assistance Center, 2010.
130. HL Roediger and JD Karpicke, 'Test-enhanced learning', in
'Psychological Science', Volume 17, Issue 3, 2006, pages 249 to 255;
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-review-series-engish
66/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English GOV.UK
HL Roediger, AL Putnam and MA Smith, 'Ten benefits of testing and
their applications to educational practice', in 'The psychology of learning
and motivation - cognition in learning', edited by JP Mestre and BH
Ross, Academic Press, 2011, pages 1 to 36.
131. NK Duke and KB Cartwright, 'The science of reading progresses:
communicating advances beyond the simple view of reading'
(https://doi.org/10.1002/rrq.411), in 'Reading Research Quarterly', Volume
56, Special Issue 1, pages 25 to 44; RM Joshi, R Treiman, S Carreker
and LC Moats, 'How words cast their spell: spelling is an integral part of
learning the language, not a matter of memorization', in 'American
Educator', Volume Winter, 2008, page 9.
132. R Smith, P Snow, T Serry and L Hammond, 'The role of background
knowledge in reading comprehension: a critical review', in 'Reading
Psychology', Volume 42, 2021, pages 214 to 240.
133. D Compton, A Miller, A Elleman and L Steacy, 'Have we forsaken
reading theory in the name of "quick fix" interventions for children with
reading disability?', in 'Scientific Studies of Reading', Volume 18, 2014,
pages 55 to 73.
134. CA Perfetti, N Landi and J Oakhill, 'The acquisition of reading
comprehension skill', in 'The science of reading: a handbook', edited by
M Snowling and C Hulme, Blackwell, 2005, pages 227 to 247.
135. T Shanahan, K Callison, C Carriere, NK Duke, PD Pearson and others,
'Improving reading comprehension in kindergarten through 3rd grade: a
practice guide', What Works Clearinghouse, 2010.
136. CA Perfetti, N Landi and J Oakhill, 'The acquisition of reading
comprehension skill', in 'The science of reading: a handbook', edited by
M Snowling and C Hulme, Blackwell, 2005, pages 227 to 247.
137. J Oakhill, K Cain and C Elbro, Understanding and teaching reading
comprehension: a handbook', Routledge, 2014.
138. T Rasinski, 'Why fluency should be hot', in 'The Reading Teacher',
Volume 65, Issue 8, 2012, pages 516 to 522.
139. CA Perfetti, N Landi and J Oakhill, 'The acquisition of reading
comprehension skill', in 'The science of reading: a handbook', edited by
M Snowling and C Hulme, Blackwell, 2005, pages 227 to 247.
140. PJ Schwanenflugel and others, 'Becoming a fluent reader: reading skill
and prosodic features in the oral reading of young readers', in 'Journal
of Educational Psychology', Volume 96, Issue 1, 2004, pages 119 to
129.
141. T Rasinski, 'Why fluency should be hot', in 'The Reading Teacher',
Volume 65, Issue 8, 2012, pages 516 to 522.
142. T Rasinski, 'Why fluency should be hot', in 'The Reading Teacher',
Volume 65, Issue 8, 2012, pages 516 to 522.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculun-research-review-series-englisfh
67/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
143. DD Paige, WH Rupley, GS Smith, TV Rasinski, W Nichols and T
Magpuri-Lavell, 'Is prosodic reading a strategy for comprehension?', in
'Journal for Educational Research Online 9', Volume 2, 2017, pages 245
to 275, quote on page 267.
144. Second example is quoted in K Carlson, 'How prosody influences
sentence comprehension' (https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-
818X.2009.00150.x), in 'Language and Linguistics Compass 3/5', 2009,
pages 1,188 to 1,200, quote on page 1, 192.
145. DD Paige, WH Rupley, GS Smith, TV Rasinski, W Nichols and T
Magpuri-Lavell, 'Is prosodic reading a strategy for comprehension?', in
'Journal for Educational Research Online 9', Volume 2, 2017, pages 245
to 275, quote on page 250.
146. RG Nathan and KE Stanovich, 'The causes and consequences of
differences in reading fluency', in 'Theory into Practice', Volume 30,
Issue 3, 1991, pages 176 to 184.
147. T Rasinski, 'Why fluency should be hot', in 'The Reading Teacher',
Volume 65, Issue 8, 2012, pages 516 to 522.
148. RG Nathan and KE Stanovich, 'The causes and consequences of
differences in reading fluency', in 'Theory into Practice', Volume 30,
Issue 3, 1991, pages 176 to 184.
149. T Rasinski, 'Why fluency should be hot', in 'The Reading Teacher',
Volume 65, Issue 8, 2012, pages 516 to 522; S Padeliadu and S
Giazitzidou, 'A synthesis of research on reading fluency development:
study of eight meta-analyses', in 'European Journal of Special
Education Research', Volume 3, Issue 4, 2018, pages 232 to 256, quote
on page 247; WH Rupley and others, 'Fluency: deep roots in reading
instruction' (https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci10060155), in 'Education
Sciences', Volume 10, 2020, page 6.
150. S Padeliadu and S Giazitzidou, 'A synthesis of research on reading
fluency development: study of eight meta-analyses'
(https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci10060155), in 'European Journal of Special
Education Research', Volume 3, Issue 4, pages 232 to 256, quote on
page 247; WH Rupley and others, 'Fluency: deep roots in reading
instruction', in 'Education Sciences', Volume 10, 2020, page 6.
151. D Didau, 'The problem with "reading along"
(https://learningspy.co.uk/reading/problem-reading-along/), The Learning Spy,
March 2017.
152. T Rasinski, 'Why fluency should be hot', in 'The Reading Teacher',
Volume 65, Issue 8, 2012, pages 516 to 522.
153. 'National curriculum in England: English programmes of study'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-england-
english-programmes-of-study/national-curriculum-in-england-english-
programmes-of-study#upper-key-stage-2-years-5-and-6). Department for
Education, July 2014.
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-engish/curiculum-researchreview-series-englisht
68/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
154. A Castles, K Rastle and K Nation, 'Ending the reading wars: reading
acquisition from novice to expert'
(https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1529100618772271), in 'Psychological Science
in the Public Interest', Volume 19, 2018, page 27.
155. S Higgins, T Martell, D Waugh, P Henderson and J Sharples, 'Improving
literacy in key stage 2: guidance report'
(https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/education-evidence/guidance-
reports/literacy-ks2), Education Endowment Foundation, November 2021;
'Teaching children to read: an evidence-based assessment of the
scientific research literature on reading and its implications for reading
instruction - reports of the sub-groups', National Reading Panel, 2000.
156. 'Teaching children to read: an evidence-based assessment of the
scientific research literature on reading and its implications for reading
instruction - reports of the sub-groups', National Reading Panel, 2000.
157. T Shanahan, 'The national reading panel report. Practical advice for
teachers' (http://eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/recordDetail?accno=ED489535),
Learning Point Associates/North Central Regional Educational
Laboratory, 2005; 'Teaching children to read: an evidence-based
assessment of the scientific research literature on reading and its
implications for reading instruction - reports of the sub-groups', National
Reading Panel, 2000.
158. DT Willingham and G Lovette, 'Can reading comprehension be taught',
in 'Teachers College Record', Volume 26, 2014.
159. Willingham, D.T., 2006. The usefulness of brief instruction in reading
comprehension strategies. American Educator, 30(4), pp.39-50.
160. DT Willingham, 'Critical thinking: why is it so hard to teach?', in 'Arts
Education Policy Review', Volume 109, Issue 4, 2008, pages 21 to 32.
161. ED Hirsch, 'Why knowledge matters: rescuing our children from failed
educational theories', Harvard Education Press, 2016.
162. K Cain, 'Reading development and difficulties', Blackwell Publishing,
2010; K Cain, JV Oakhill and C Elbro, 'The ability to learn new word
meanings from context by school-age children with and without
language comprehension difficulties', in 'Journal of Child Language',
Volume 30, Issue 3, 2003, pages 681 to 694; R Smith, P Snow, T Serry
and L Hammond, 'The role of background knowledge in reading
comprehension: a critical review'
(https://doi.org/10.1080/02702711.2021.1888348), in 'Reading Psychology',
Volume 42, Issue 3, 2021, pages 214 to 240.
163. D Willingham, 'Infer this...' (http://www.danielwillingham.com/daniel-
willingham-science-and-education-blog/infer-this), Science & Education, May
2018.
164. M Elleman, 'Examining the impact of inference instruction on the literal
and inferential comprehension of skilled and less skilled readers: a
htps://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
69/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
meta-analytic review', in 'Journal of Educational Psychology', Volume
109, 2017, pages 761 to 781.
165. PA Kirschner, J Sweller and RE Clark, 'Why minimal guidance during
instruction does not work: an analysis of the failure of constructivist,
discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-based teaching', in
'Educational Psychologist, Issue 41, 2006, pages 75 to 86.
166. N Cowan, 'Working memory capacity', Psychology Press, 2005.
167. M Melby-Lervåg, T Redick and C Hulme, 'Working memory training
does not improve performance on measures of intelligence or other
measures of "far transfer", in 'Perspectives on Psychological Science',
Volume 11, 2016, pages 512 to 534; D Simons, W Boot, N Charness, S
Gathercole, c Chabris, D Hambrick and E Stine-Morrow, 'Do "brain-
training" programs work?', in 'Psychological Science in the Public
Interest', Volume 17, 2016, pages 103 to 186.
168. A Castles, K Rastle and K Nation, 'Ending the reading wars: reading
acquisition from novice to expert', in 'Psychological Science in the
Public Interest', Volume 19, 2018, pages 5 to 51.
169. T Cremin, M Mottram, F Collins, S Powell and K Safford, 'Teachers as
readers: building communities of readers', in 'Literacy', Volume 43,
Issue 1, 2009, pages 11 to 19; J De Naeghel, H Van Keer, M
Vansteenkiste and Y Rosseel, 'The relation between elementary
students' recreational and academic reading motivation, reading
frequency, engagement, and comprehension: a self-determination
theory perspective', in 'Journal of Educational Psychology', Volume 104,
Issue 4, 2012, pages 1,006 to 1,021; C Clark and K Rumbold, 'Reading
for pleasure: a research overview' (https://literacytrust.org.uk/research-
services/research-reports/reading-pleasure-research-overview/) National
Literacy Trust, November 2006.
170. For example: J Toste, L Didion, P Peng, M Filderman and A McClelland,
'A meta-analytic review of the relations between motivation and reading
achievement for K-12 students', in 'Review of Educational Research',
Volume 90, 2020; M Torppa, P Niemi, K Vasalampi, M Lerkkanen, A
Tolvanen and A Poikkeus, 'Leisure reading (but not any kind) and
reading comprehension: a longitudinal study across grades 1 and 9', in
'Child Development', Volume 91, 2019, pages 876 to 900; J De
Naeghel, H Van Keer, M Vansteenkiste and Y Rosseel, 'The relation
between elementary students' recreational and academic reading
motivation, reading frequency, engagement, and comprehension: a self-
determination theory perspective', in 'Journal of Educational
Psychology', Volume 104, 2012, pages 1,006 to 1,021; 'Reading for
change: performance and engagement across countries'
(https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264099289-en), Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development, 2002; JT Guthrie and E Anderson,
'Engagement in reading: processes of motivated, knowledgeable, social
readers', in 'Engaged reading: processes, practices, and policy
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-researchreview-series-englisht
70/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
implications', edited by JT Guthrie and D Alverman, Teachers College
Press, 1999, pages 17 to 45.
171. A Cunningham and K Stanovich, 'What reading does for the mind', in
'American Educator', Volume 22, 1998, pages 8 to 15.
172. A Sullivan and M Brown, 'Reading for pleasure and progress in
vocabulary and mathematics', in 'British Educational Research Journal',
Volume 41, Issue 6, 2015, pages 971 to 991; RA Mar and M Rain,
'Narrative fiction and expository nonfiction differentially predict verbal
ability', in 'Scientific Studies of Reading', Volume 19, 2015, pages 419 to
433.
173. T Cremin and D Myhill, 'Writing voices: creating communities of writers',
Routledge, 2012.
174. JR Toste, L Didion, P Peng, MJ Filderman and AM McClelland, 'A meta-
analytic review of the relations between motivation and reading
achievement for K-12 students', in 'Review of Educational Research',
Volume 90, Issue 3, 2020, pages 420 to 456.
175. L Baker and D Scher, 'Beginning readers' motivation for reading in
relation to parental beliefs and home reading experiences', in 'Reading
Psychology', Volume 23, Issue 4, 2002, pages 239 to 269.
176. T Cremin, M Mottram, F Collins, S Powell and K Safford, 'Building
communities of readers: reading for pleasure', 2014, Routledge.
177. A Castles, K Rastle and K Nation, 'Ending the reading wars: reading
acquisition from novice to expert'
(https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1529100618772271), in 'Psychological Science
in the Public Interest', Volume 19, 2018, page 27.
178. 'The national literacy strategy. Framework for teaching', Department for
Education and Employment, 1998.
179. 'The national curriculum in England: framework document'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-england-
framework-for-key-stages-1-to-4), Department for Education, September
2013.
180. 'The national curriculum in England: framework document'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-england-
framework-for-key-stages-1-to-4), Department for Education, September
2013.
181. RT Kellogg, AP Whiteford, CE Turner, M Cahill and A Mertens, 'Working
memory in written composition: an evaluation of the 1996 model', in
'Journal of Writing Research', Volume 5, Issue 2, 2013, pages 159 to
190.
182. RT Kellogg, AP Whiteford, CE Turner, M Cahill and A Mertens, 'Working
memory in written composition: an evaluation of the 1996 model', in
'Journal of Writing Research', Volume 5, Issue 2, 2013, pages 159 to
190.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculun-research-review-series-englisfh
71/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
183. R Malatesha Joshi, R Treiman, S Carreker and LC Moats, 'How words
cast their spell: spelling is an integral part of learning the language, not
a matter of memorization', in 'American Educator', Volume Winter, 2008,
pages 6 to 43; B Singer and A Bashir, 'Developmental variations in
writing', in 'Handbook of language and literacy', edited by A Stone and
others, Guilford Press, 2004, pages 559 to 582.
184. S Graham, KR Harris and T Santangelo, 'Research-based writing
practices and the common core: meta analysis and meta synthesis', in
'The Elementary School Journal', Volume 115, Issue 4, 2015, pages 498
to 522.
185. R Malatesha Joshi, R Treiman, S Carreker and LC Moats, 'How words
cast their spell: spelling is an integral part of learning the language, not
a matter of memorization', in 'American Educator', Volume Winter, 2008,
pages 6 to 43.
186. LC Moats, 'How spelling supports reading and why it is more regular
and predictable than you may think', American Federation of Teachers,
2005.
187. S Graham and T Santangelo, 'Does spelling instruction make students
better spellers, readers, and writers? A meta-analytic review', in
'Reading and Writing', Volume 27, 2014, pages 1,703 to 1,743.
188. 'National curriculum in England: English programmes of study. English
appendix 1: spelling (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-
curriculum-in-england-english-programmes-of-study), Department for
Education, September 2013.
189. R Malatesha Joshi, R Treiman, S Carreker and LC Moats, 'How words
cast their spell: spelling is an integral part of learning the language, not
a matter of memorization', in 'American Educator', Volume Winter, 2008,
pages 6 to 43.
190. T Shanahan, 'The national reading panel report. Practical advice for
teachers' (http://eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/recordDetail?accno=ED489535),
Learning Point Associates/North Central Regional Educational
Laboratory, 2005, page 13.
191. S Higgins, T Martell, D Waugh, P Henderson and J Sharples, 'Improving
literacy in key stage 2: guidance report'
(https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/education-evidence/guidance-
reports/literacy-ks2), Education Endowment Foundation, November 2021;
A Quigley and R Coleman, 'Improving literacy in secondary schools',
Education Endowment Foundation, 2019.
192. A Quigley and R Coleman, 'Improving literacy in secondary schools',
Education Endowment Foundation, 2019.
193. S Higgins, T Martell, D Waugh, P Henderson and J Sharples, 'Improving
literacy in key stage 2: guidance report'
(https://educationendowmenffoundation.org.uk/education-evidence/guidance-
reports/literacy-ks2), Education Endowment Foundation, November 2021;
https://wwwgov.uk/govenment/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-review-series-engish
72/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
VW Berninger, K Vaughan, RD Abbott and others, Language-based
spelling instruction: teaching children to make multiple connections
between spoken and written words', in 'Learning Disability Quarterly',
Volume 23, Issue 2, 2000, pages 117 to 135; 'Early years foundation
stage profile pilot' (https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/projects-and-
evaluation/projects/early-years-foundation-stage-profile-pilot), Education
Endowment Foundation, October 2019.
194. Y Petscher and others, 'How the science of reading informs 21st century
education' (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8128160/), in
'Reading Research Quarterly, Volume 55, Issue 1, 2020, pages 1 to 25.
195. S Higgins, T Martell, D Waugh, P Henderson and J Sharples, 'Improving
literacy in key stage 2: guidance report'
(https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/education-evidence/guidance-
reports/literacy-ks2), Education Endowment Foundation, November 2021.
196. A Quigley and R Coleman, 'Improving literacy in secondary schools',
Education Endowment Foundation, 2019.
197. LC Moats, 'How spelling supports reading and why it is more regular
and predictable than you may think', American Federation of Teachers,
2005, page 17.
198. SC Pan, TC Rickard and RA Bjork, 'Does spelling still matter-and if so,
how should it be taught? Perspectives from contemporary and historical
research', in 'Educational Psychology Review', 2021.
199. KR Harris, S Graham, AA Aitken, A Barkel, J Houston and A Ray,
'Teaching spelling, writing, and reading for writing: powerful evidence-
based practices', in 'Teaching Exceptional Children', Volume 49, Issue
4, 2017, pages 262 to 272; SC Pan and TC Rickard, 'Transfer of test-
enhanced learning: meta-analytic review and synthesis', in
'Psychological Bulletin', Volume 144, 2018, pages 710 to 756.
200. D Myhill and R Fisher, 'Editorial: writing development: cognitive,
sociocultural, linguistic perspectives', in 'Journal of Research in
Reading', Volume 33, 2010, pages 1 to 3.
201. S Graham, K Harris and T Santangelo, 'Research-based writing
practices and the common core', in 'The Elementary School Journal',
Volume 115, 2015, pages 498 to 522; R Andrews, C Torgerson, S
Beverton, A Freeman, T Locke, G Low, A Robinson and D Zhu, 'The
effect of grammar teaching on writing development, in 'British
Educational Research Journal', Volume 32, 2006.
202. S Graham, A Bollinger, C Booth Olson, C D'Aoust, C MacArthur, D
McCutchen and N Olinghouse, 'Teaching elementary school students to
be effective writers: a practice guide', National Center for Education
Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences,
2012; B Saddler and S Graham, 'The effects of peer-assisted sentence-
combining instruction on the writing performance of more and less
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publicatons/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
73/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English GOV.UK
skilled young writers', in 'Journal of Educational Psychology', Volume
97, 2005, pages 43 to 54.
203. T Shanahan, K Callison, C Carriere, NK Duke, PD Pearson and others,
'Improving reading comprehension in kindergarten through 3rd grade: a
practice guide', What Works Clearinghouse, 2010.
204. B Saddler and S Graham, 'The effects of peer-assisted sentence-
combining instruction on the writing performance of more and less
skilled young writers', in 'Journal of Educational Psychology', Volume
97, Issue 1, 2005, pages 43 to 54.
205. S Graham and D Perin, 'Writing next: effective strategies to improve
writing in adolescents in middle and high schools - a report to Carnegie
Corporation of New York', Alliance for Excellent Education, 2007.
206. S Graham, 'Changing how writing is taught', in 'Review of Research in
Education', Volume 43, 2019, pages 277 to 303.
207. S Graham and others, 'Evidence-based practice and writing instruction',
in 'Handbook of writing research' edited by C MacArthur, S Graham and
J Fitzgerald, Volume 2, Guilford Press, pages 211 to 226.
208. N Olinghouse, S Graham and A Gillespie Rouse, 'The relationship of
discourse and topic knowledge to fifth graders' writing performance', in
'Journal of Educational Psychology', 2014, pages 107 to 115; L DeGroff,
'The influence of prior knowledge on writing, conferencing, and revising',
in 'Elementary School Journal', Volume 88, 1987, pages 105 to 118.
209. N Olinghouse, S Graham and A Gillespie Rouse, 'The relationship of
discourse and topic knowledge to fifth graders' writing performance', in
'Journal of Educational Psychology', 2014, pages 107 to 115.
210. S Graham, K Harris and T Santangelo, 'Research-based writing
practices and the common core, in 'The Elementary School Journal',
Volume 115, 2015, pages 498 to 522; S Graham, D McKeown, SA
Kiuhara and K Harris, 'A meta-analysis of writing instruction for students
in the elementary grades', in 'Journal of Educational Psychology',
Volume 104, 2012, pages 879 to 896; S Graham and D Perin, 'A meta-
analysis of writing instruction for adolescent students', in 'Journal of
Educational Psychology', Volume 9, 2007, pages 445 to 476.
211. C Bereiter and M Scardamalia, 'The psychology of written composition',
Routledge, 1987.
212. C Bereiter and M Scardamalia, 'The psychology of written composition',
Routledge, 1987.
213. For example, S Graham and D Perin, 'A meta-analysis of writing
instruction for adolescent students', in 'Journal of Educational
Psychology', Volume 9, 2007, pages 445 to 476; S Graham, K Harris
and T Santangelo, 'Research-based writing practices and the common
core, in 'The Elementary School Journal', Volume 115, 2015, pages 498
to 522; S Graham, A Bollinger, C Booth Olson, C D'Aoust, C MacArthur,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
74/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
D McCutchen and N Olinghouse, 'Teaching elementary school students
to be effective writers: a practice guide', National Center for Education
Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences,
2012.
214. S Graham and K Sandmel, 'The process writing approach: a meta-
analysis', in 'Journal of Educational Research', Volume 104, Issue 6,
2011, pages 396 to 407.
215. S Graham and K Sandmel, 'The process writing approach: a meta-
analysis', in 'Journal of Educational Research', Volume 104, Issue 6,
2011, pages 396 to 407.
216. S Graham, KR Harris and T Santangelo, 'Research-based writing
practices and the common core: meta analysis and meta synthesis', in
'The Elementary School Journal', Volume 115, Issue 4, 2015, pages 498
to 522.
217. S Graham and D Perin, 'Writing next: effective strategies to improve
writing in adolescents in middle and high schools - a report to Carnegie
Corporation of New York', Alliance for Excellent Education, 2007.
218. S Graham, D McKeown, SA Kiuhara and K Harris, 'A meta-analysis of
writing instruction for students in the elementary grades', in 'Journal of
Educational Psychology', Volume 104, 2012, pages 879 to 896; K
Harris, S Graham, B Friedlander and L Laud, 'Bring powerful writing
strategies into your classroom! Why and how', in 'Reading Teacher',
Volume 66, Issue 7, 2013, pages 538 to 542.
219. S Graham and D Perin, 'Writing next: effective strategies to improve
writing in adolescents in middle and high schools - a report to Carnegie
Corporation of New York', Alliance for Excellent Education, 2007.
220. S Graham, X Liu, A Aitken, C Ng, B Bartlett and others, 'Effectiveness of
literacy programs balancing reading and writing instruction: a meta-
analysis', in 'Reading Research Quarterly', Volume 53, Issue 3, 2018,
pages 279 to 304.
221. S Graham, KR Harris and A Chambers, 'Evidence-based practice and
writing instruction: a review of reviews', in 'Handbook of writing
research', edited by C MacArthur, S Graham and J Fitzgerald, Guilford
Press, 2016, pages 211 to 226.
222. J Sweller, P Ayres and S Kalyuga, 'Cognitive load theory', Springer,
2011; S Kyun, S Kalyuga and J Sweller, 'The effect of worked examples
when learning to write essays in English literature', in 'Journal of
Experimental Education', Volume 81, Issue 3, 2013, pages 385 to 408.
223. N Olinghouse, S Graham and A Gillespie Rouse, 'The relationship of
discourse and topic knowledge to fifth graders' writing performance', in
'Journal of Educational Psychology', 2014, pages 107 to 115.
224. S Gibbons, "Death by PEEL?" The teaching of writing in the secondary
English classroom in England', in 'English in Education', Volume 53,
htps://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculum-research-review-series-engisa
75/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
2019, pages 36 to 45.
225. For example, see: R Slavin, C Lake, A Inns, A Baye, D Dachet and J
Haslam, 'A quantitative synthesis of research on writing approaches in
key stage 2 and secondary schools', Education Endowment Foundation,
2019; S Graham, C MacArthur and J Fitzgerald, 'Best practices in
writing instruction', Guilford Press, 2019; K Harris, S Graham, and LH
Mason, 'Improving the writing, knowledge, and motivation of struggling
young writers: effects of self-regulated strategy development with and
without peer support', in 'American Educational Research Journal',
Volume 43, 2006, pages 295 to 340.
226. S Graham, C MacArthur and J Fitzgerald, 'Best practices in writing
instruction', Guilford Press, 2019; S Graham, K Harris and T
Santangelo, 'Research-based writing practices and the common core',
in 'The Elementary School Journal', Volume 115, 2015, pages 498 to
522.
227. J Hattie, 'Visible learning: a synthesis of meta-analysis relating to
achievement, Routledge, 2009; J Scheerens and R Bosker, 'The
foundations of educational effectiveness',' Pergamon, 1997.
228. 'Knowledge for 2030' (https://www.oecd.org/education/2030-project/),
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2019, page
4.
229. 'Knowledge for 2030' (https://www.oecd.org/education/2030-project/),
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2019.
230. See also C Atherton, A Green and G Snapper, 'Teaching English
literature 16-19', Routledge, 2013.
231. A Standish, 'School subjects', in 'What should schools teach: disciplines,
subjects and the pursuit of truth'
(https://www.uclpress.co.uk/products/165025#), edited by M Pettet, A Sehgal
Cuthbert and A Standish, second edition, UCL Press, 2021, pages 38 to
53.
232. K Anders Ericsson, RT Krampe and C Tesch-Römer, 'The role of
deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance', in
'Psychological Review', Volume 100, Issue 3, 1993, pages 363 to 406.
233. K Anders Ericsson, RT Krampe and C Tesch-Römer, 'The role of
deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance', in
'Psychological Review', Volume 100, Issue 3, 1993, pages 363 to 406.
234. A Tharby, 'Round and round we go: teaching English in spirals'
(https://reflectingenglish.wordpress.com/2014/09/19/round-and-round-we-go-
teaching-english-in-spirals/), Reflecting English, September 2014.
235. M Appel and T Richter, 'Persuasive effects of fictional narratives
increase over time', in 'Media Psychology', Volume 10, 2007.
236. V Elliott, 'Knowledge in English: canon, curriculum and cultural literacy',
Routledge, 2021.
htps://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-english.
76/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
237. D Lemov, C Driggs and E Woolway, 'Reading reconsidered: a practical
guide to rigorous literacy instruction', Jossey-Bass, 2016.
238. C Counsell, 'Senior curriculum leadership 1: the indirect manifestation of
knowledge: (B) final performance as deceiver and guide'
(https://thedignityofthethingblog.wordpress.com/2018/04/12/senior-curiculum-
leadership-1-the-indirect-manifestation-of-knowledge-b-final-performance-as-
deceiver-and-guide), The Dignity of the Thing, April 2018.
239. C Stoneman, 'Thinking through transition 2020: English'
(https://birminghamteacher.wordpress.com/2020/04/12thinking-through-
transition-2020-english/), Birmingham Teacher, April 2020.
240. D Didau, 'Making meaning in English: exploring the role of knowledge in
the English curriculum', Routledge, 2021.
241. J Westbrook, J Sutherland, J Oakhill and S Sullivan, "Just reading": the
impact of a faster pace of reading narratives on the comprehension of
poorer adolescent readers in English classrooms', in 'Literacy', Volume
53, Issue 2, 2019, pages 60 to 68.
242. A Sehgal Cuthbert, 'English literature', in 'What should schools teach?
Disciplines, subjects and the pursuit of truth', edited by A Sehgal
Cuthbert and A Standish, second edition, UCL Press, 2021.
243. A Sehgal Cuthbert, 'English literature', in 'What should schools teach?
Disciplines, subjects and the pursuit of truth', edited by A Sehgal
Cuthbert and A Standish, second edition, UCL Press, 2021.
244. A Applebee, 'Curriculum as conversation', University of Chicago Press,
2008.
245. I Warwick and R Speakman, 'Redefining English for the more able: a
practical guide', Routledge, 2018.
246. A Applebee, 'Curriculum as conversation', University of Chicago Press,
2008.
247. L Nelson-Addy, V Elliott and G Snapper, 'Changing the narrative in the
literature classroom', in 'Teaching English', Issue 23, 2020, pages 34 to
40.
248. D Didau, 'Do young adult novels have a place in the English
curriculum?' (https://learningspy.co.uk/english-gcse/do-young-adult-novels-
have-a-place-in-the-english-curriculum/), Learning Spy, July 2021.
249. J Hattie and H Timperley, 'The power of feedback', in 'Review of
Educational Research', Volume 77, Issue 1, 2007, pages 81 to 112; B
Wisniewski, K Zierer and J Hattie, 'The power of feedback revisited: a
meta-analysis of educational feedback research', in 'Frontiers in
Psychology', Volume 10, Issue 3,087, 2020, pages 1 to 14.
250. P Black and D Wiliam, 'Assessment and classroom learning', in
'Assessment in Education: Principles, Policy & Practice', Volume 5,
Issue 1, 1998, pages 7 to 74.
htps://www.gov.uk/govenment/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curiculun-research-review-series-english
77/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English GOV.UK
251. D Christodoulou, 'Making good progress? The future of assessment for
learning', Oxford University Press, 2016.
252. S Graham, M Hebert and K Harris, 'Formative assessment and writing:
a meta-analysis', in 'The Elementary School Journal', Volume 115, Issue
4, 2015, pages 523 to 547.
253. B Butterfield and J Metcalfe, 'The correction of errors with high
confidence', in 'Metacognition Learning', Volume 1, 2006, pages 69 to
84.
254. P Black, C Harrison, C Lee, B Marshall and D Wiliam, 'Working inside
the black box: assessment for learning in the classroom', in 'Phi Delta
Kappan', Volume 86, Issue 1, 2004, pages 8 to 21.
255. B Wisniewski, K Zierer and J Hattie, 'The power of feedback revisited: a
meta-analysis of educational feedback research', in 'Frontiers in
Psychology', Volume 10, 2020, page 3,087; A Kluger and A DeNisi, 'The
effects of feedback interventions on performance: a historical review, a
meta-analysis, and a preliminary feedback intervention theory', in
'Psychological Bulletin', Volume 119, 1996, pages 254 to 284.
256. D Wiliam, 'Embedded formative assessment', Solution Tree Press,
2018.
257. B Wisniewski, K Zierer and J Hattie, 'The power of feedback revisited: a
meta-analysis of educational feedback research', in 'Frontiers in
Psychology', Volume 10, Issue 3,087, 2020, pages 1 to 14; J Hattie and
H Timperley, 'The power of feedback', in 'Review of Educational
Research', Volume 77, Issue 1, 2007, pages 81 to 112.
258. B Wisniewski, K Zierer and J Hattie, 'The power of feedback revisited: a
meta-analysis of educational feedback research', in 'Frontiers in
Psychology', Volume 10, Issue 3,087, 2020, pages 1 to 14; J Hattie and
H Timperley, 'The power of feedback', in 'Review of Educational
Research', Volume 77, Issue 1, 2007, pages 81 to 112.
259. B Wisniewski, K Zierer and J Hattie, 'The power of feedback revisited: a
meta-analysis of educational feedback research', in 'Frontiers in
Psychology', Volume 10, Issue 3,087, 2020, pages 1 to 14; J Hattie and
H Timperley, 'The power of feedback', in 'Review of Educational
Research', Volume 77, Issue 1, 2007, pages 81 to 112.
260. CL Watkins and TA Slocum, 'The components of direct instruction', in
'Journal of Direct Instruction', Volume 3, Issue 2, 2004, pages 75 to
110.
261. NC Soderstrom and RA Bjork, 'Learning versus performance', in 'Oxford
bibliographies online: psychology', edited by DS Dunn, Oxford
University Press, 2015.
262. J Scheerens and R Bosker, 'The foundations of educational
effectiveness', Pergamon, 1997.
htps://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curriculum-research-review-series-english/curiculun-research-review-series-englislh
78/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
263. B Marshall and D Wiliam, 'English inside the black box', Letts
Educational, 2006.
264. D Wiliam, 'Embedded formative assessment', Solution Tree Press,
2018, page 59.
265. B Agricola, F Prins and D Sluijsmans, 'Impact of feedback request forms
and verbal feedback on higher education students' feedback perception,
self-efficacy, and motivation', in 'Assessment in Education: Principles,
Policy & Practice', Volume 27, 2020, pages 6 to 25.
266. D Wiliam and C Christodolou 'Assessment, marking and feedback', in
'What does this look like in the classroom: bridging the gap between
research and practice', edited by C Hendrick and R Macpherson, John
Catt, 2017; D Wiliam, 'Embedded formative assessment', Solution Tree
Press, 2018.
267. J Sweller, JJG van Merrienboer and FGWC Paas, 'Cognitive
architecture and instructional design', in 'Educational Psychology
Review', Volume 10, Issue 3, 1998, pages 251 to 296; S Kyun, S
Kalyuga and J Sweller, 'The effect of worked examples when learning to
write essays in English literature', in 'Journal of Experimental
Education', Volume 81, Issue 3, 2013, pages 385 to 408.
268. 'Marking consistency metrics', Ofqual, 2018, pages 1 to 49.
269. Q He, S Anwyll, M Glanville and A Deavall, 'An investigation of the
reliability of marking of the key stage 2 national curriculum English
writing tests in England', in 'Educational Research', Volume 55, Issue 4,
2013, pages 393 to 410.
270. 'Making data work: report of the teacher workload advisory group'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/teacher-workload-advisory-group-
report-and-government-response), UCL Institute of Education Centre for
Education Improvement Science and Department for Education,
November 2018.
271. BM Moskal and JA Leydens, 'Scoring rubric development: validity and
reliability', in 'Practical Assessment, Research & Evaluation', Volume 7,
Issue 10, 2000, pages 71 to 81; WJ Popham, 'The instructional
consequences of criterion-referenced clarity', in 'Educational
Measurement: Issues and Practice', Volume 13, Issue 4, 2005, pages
15 to 18.
272. T Bramley and S Vitello, 'The effect of adaptivity on the reliability
coefficient in adaptive comparative judgement', in 'Assessment in
Education: Principles, Policy & Practice', Volume 26, Issue 1, 2018,
pages 43 to 58; S Verhavert, R Bouwer, V Donche and S De Maeyer, 'A
meta-analysis on the reliability of comparative judgement', in
'Assessment in Education: Principles, Policy & Practice', Volume 26,
Issue 5, 2019, pages 541 to 562; T Benton and T Gallacher, 'Is
comparative judgement just a quick form of multiple marking?', in
'Research Matters: A Cambridge Assessment Publication', Volume 24,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
79/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
2018, pages 37 to 40; 'Marking reliability studies 2017: rank ordering
versus marking - which is more reliable?', Ofqual, 2018.
273. M Lesterhuis, T van Daal, R Van Gasse, L Coertjens, V Donche and S
De Maeyer, 'When teachers compare argumentative texts. Decisions
informed by multiple complex aspects of text quality', in 'L1-Educational
Studies in Language and Literature', Volume 18, 2018, pages 1 to 22; T
van Daal, M Lesterhuis, L Coertjens, V Donche and S De Maeyer,
'Validity of comparative judgement to assess academic writing:
examining implications of its holistic character and building on a shared
consensus', in 'Assessment in Education: Principles, Policy & Practice',
Volume 26, Issue 1, 2019, pages 59 to 74.
274. J Oakhill, K Cain and C Elbro, Understanding and teaching reading
comprehension: a handbook', Routledge, 2014.
275. 'National curriculum assessments at key stage 2 in England, 2019
(revised)' (https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/national-curriculum-
assessments-key-stage-2-2019-revised), Department for Education,
December 2019.
276. S Stothard, M Snowling and C Hulme, 'The rate and identification of
reading difficulties in secondary school pupils in England', in 'Centre for
Reading and Language, Department of Psychology, University of York',
2010.
277. H Morris, 'Developing literacy intervention for older students struggling
with literacy: how does research inform our choices and decisions ?'
(https://www.ucl.ac.uk/reading-recovery-europe/grow-ks3) International
Literacy Centre, UCL Institute of Education, 2018; MF Hock, IF
Brasseur, DD Deshler, HW Catts, JG Marquis and others, 'What is the
reading component skill profile of adolescent struggling readers in urban
schools?', in 'Learning Disability Quarterly', Volume 32, Issue 1, 2009,
pages 21 to 38; A Talwar, D Greenberg and H Li, 'Identifying profiles of
struggling adult readers: relative strengths and weaknesses in lower-
level and higher-level competencies', in 'Reading and Writing', Volume
33, Issue 9, 2020, pages 2, 155 to 2,171.
278. J Oakhill, K Cain and C Elbro, Understanding and teaching reading
comprehension. A handbook', Routledge, 2015, page 28.
279. 'Education inspection framework: overview of research'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/education-inspection-framework-
overview-of-research), Ofsted, January 2019.
280. N Bennett, P Woods, C Wise and W Newton, "Understandings of middle
leadership in secondary schools: a review of empirical research', in
'School Leadership and Management', Volume 27, Issue 5, 2007, pages
453 to 470; P Sammons, S Thomas and P Mortimore, 'Forging links:
effective schools and effective departments', Sage, 1997.
281. RL Engle, ER Lopez, KE Gormley, JA Chan, MP Charns and CV Lukas.
'What roles do middle managers play in implementation of innovative
htps://wwwgov.uk/government/publicatons/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
80/81
4/11/26, 4:05 PM
Research review series: English - GOV.UK
practices?', in 'Health Care Management Review, Volume 42, Issue 1,
2017, pages 14 to 27; 'HMCI commentary: curriculum and the new
education inspection framework'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/hmci-commentary-curriculum-and-
the-new-education-inspection-framework), Ofsted, September 2018.
282. 'Education inspection framework: overview of research'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/education-inspection-framework-
overview-of-research), Ofsted, January 2019.
283. R Coe, CJ Rauch, S Kime and D Singleton, 'Great teaching toolkit
evidence review', Evidence Based Education, 2020.
284. B Creemers, L Kyriakides and P Antoniou, 'Teacher professional
development for improving quality of teaching', Sringer, 2013.
285. P Cordingley, S Higgins, T Greany, N Buckler, D Coles-Jordan, B Crisp,
L Saunders and R Coe, 'Developing great teaching: lessons from the
international reviews into effective professional development, Teacher
Development Trust, 2015.
286. Reid Smith, Pamela Snow, Tanya Serry & Lorraine Hammond (2021)
The Role of Background Knowledge in Reading Comprehension: A
Critical Review, Reading Psychology, 42:3, 214-240, DOI:
10.1080/02702711.2021.1888348; pp 232-233.
OGL
DIEUET
MONDROIT
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
© Crown copyright
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publicatons/curiculum-research-review-series-english/curriculum-research-review-series-englisht
81/81
