4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing I Local Government Association
Local
Government
Association
Schools White Paper, Every child
achieving and thriving - LGA briefing
25 Feb 2026
Introduction
On 23 February the Government published a Schools White Paper,
Every child achieving and thriving (https://www.gov.uk/governmen
t/publications/every-child-achieving-and-thriving) which proposes
significant reforms to the education and Special Educational Needs and
Disabilities (SEND) systems in England. A consultation on reforms to
the SEND system, SEND reform: putting children and young people
first (https://consult.education.gov.uk/send-strategy-division/send-
reform-putting-children-and-young-people-firs/), was published
alongside the Schools White Paper and sets out a broader set of
reforms which build on the proposals set out in chapter 3 of the White
Paper. The LGA will be working closely with member councils in the
coming weeks to shape our consultation response.
Key LGA messages
Councils have long been calling for reform of the
education system to ensure the needs of more
children and young people with SEND can be met
within mainstream settings where appropriate and
without the need for a statutory plan. We are
pleased that the government has acted on those
calls, with an ambitious set of reforms with children
and young people with SEND at their centre. We
1 of 17
PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing I Local Government Association
look forward to working with the government,
including the Departments for Education, Health
and Social Care and Housing, Communities and
Local Government (we are clear that tackling the
SEND crisis requires a cross-government
response), as well as partners including parents
and carers and, most importantly, children and
young people themselves to co-produce these
reforms with a clear focus on improving outcomes.
We will also continue to work with the Department
of Education to support councils and partners to
drive improvement in the existing system, ahead of
these reforms being implemented.
The White Paper rightly acknowledges that reforms
to the SEND system will be far-reaching and will
need to be phased in over time, whilst ensuring that
need continues to be met within the existing
statutory framework. Timescales need to be kept
under review to ensure they are realistic and there
will need to be sufficient funding to both build
capacity now and ensure that the transition to the
new system is effective.
We welcome the inclusion of the early years and
the recognition that getting it right early for children
can have long-lasting impacts. We were particularly
pleased to see national roll out of Best Start Family
Hubs with a specific role for supporting families with
SEND. This needs to be backed up by sufficient
funding into the early years workforce, and
continued recognition of and investment into
councils' key role in supporting inclusive early years
systems.
The investment of £1.8 billion over three years to
fund the 'Experts at Hand' programme of specialist
support is welcome. We await further detail on how
2 of 17
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing | Local Government Association
this funding will be allocated to councils and ICBs,
as well as the conditions that accompany it. We
also ask for confirmation that this is 'new' funding
and is not coming from existing budgets for councils
or education. In the meantime, we are concerned
that 'Experts at Hand' could unrealistically raise
expectations as to the level of support that will be
available, particularly given the time it will take to
embed these proposals in local areas.
We welcome the proposal to change the law on
independent special schools to ensure that children
get suitable high-quality placements and that
councils pay a reasonable price for them.
We also welcome the proposal to enable councils to
establish school trusts. However, there is no detail
on how the intention of "moving to all schools
joining or forming high-quality school trusts" is to be
achieved. We believe that it should be open to
schools to choose to become an academy and join
a trust but would not want to see compulsion. Other
models of collaboration should be permitted if they
are successful at delivering school improvement.
Finally, these reforms must be financially
sustainable to ensure they stand the test of time
and can deliver the right outcomes for children both
now and in the future. The recent announcement
that 90 per cent of councils' historic Dedicated
Schools Grant (DSG) deficits will be written off is
welcome and provides councils with some
breathing space whilst reforms set out in the White
Paper are implemented and capacity in the existing
system is increased. But the 90 per cent write-off
implies that councils will have to manage a residual
debt of around £500 million while the OBR has
forecast that new deficits of £8.7 billion will then
3 of 17
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing I Local Government Association
accrue over 2026-27 and 2027-28. To ensure that
discussions on reform focus solely on meeting the
needs of children and young people with SEND
quickly and effectively, government must commit to
ensuring that all DSG deficits are written off, ahead
of the statutory override ending in March 2028.
Councils will also need additional funding to meet
the growing need for home-to-school transport for
children and young people with SEND.
1. Our children's futures
Summary of white paper proposals
This chapter sets out the Government's ambition for all children to
enjoy a childhood rich in opportunity. Every Best Start Family Hub
will have a dedicated SEND practitioner, backed by over £200
million investment over three years.
There will be additional funding from the government's Inclusive
Early Years Fund to early years providers to identify and respond
where children have emerging additional needs.
A Childcare and Early Education Review will look at how to
improve access to early education and care, making the system
simpler for families and delivering a coherent local offer.
Government will create a new model of local partnership and
shared accountability for children's outcomes across local
communities. The aim is to enable the conditions that allow a
sense of collective endeavour and responsibility: binding local
government, schools and trusts, Integrated Care Boards, police,
and other local stakeholders around the aim of delivering shared
outcomes for children and young people.
LGA view
We welcome the recognition of the crucial role of councils in
supporting the delivery of high- quality education and childcare and
will continue to work with government to shape the Childcare and
Early Education Review.
4 of 17
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing | Local Government Association
The White Paper recognises that new partnerships will need to be
built at a local level to support a shared ambition to see every child
achieving and thriving. We look forward to working with the
Government and partners to establish shared local accountability.
We have welcomed the national roll out of Best Start Family Hubs
and the increased focus on supporting families with SEND. We
know that too often it can be challenging for families to access the
support that they need early on. It is important that this support is
flexible to enable local areas to align it with existing approaches,
and to ensure there are not further barriers to families or siloes
between services.
New inclusion funding at an early stage that removes bureaucracy
and is targeted at ensuring children and early years providers get
the support they need, is crucial. We would like to see this funding
allocated to local authorities so that they can improve the
coordination of services at a local level, rather than piecemeal
funding being given to providers. This reflects the findings set out
in our report on SEND and the early years (https://www.local.g
ov.uk/publications/rising-needs-early-years-research-supporti
ng-children-early-years) that this is the most impactful and
innovative way to use additional funding.
2. Narrow to broad
Summary of white paper proposals
This chapter sets out the ambition that schools provide children
with a rich and broad education that supports educational success,
ignites curiosity and lays the foundations for a rich and fulfilling life
and career.
This begins with strong foundations through a broad early years
curriculum. Excellence in maths and science will provide the
problem-solvers of tomorrow.
A strong enrichment offer and revitalised arts curriculum will spark
children's creativity. Access to sports, culture and nature will
expand their horizons. Civic engagement will stretch their abilities
beyond the classroom.
5 of 17
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing I Local Government Association
Partnerships between early years settings and schools will be
funded to test and implement different approaches to transitions,
including for children with SEND.
Alan Milburn's Young People and Work investigation (https://w
ww.gov.uk/government/calls-for-evidence/young-people-and-
work-report-call-for-evidence) is referenced, which will
recommend ways to increase opportunities for young people not in
education, employment or training.
Improving partnerships between early years settings and schools
is key and government would expect local government to be a
crucial partner in this to ensure the right support is wrapped around
children and their families.
LGA view
Councils' current post-16 statutory duties are to provide sufficient
education and training places for 16- and 17-year-olds (up to 25 for
those with an EHC plan) through Raising Participation Age (RPA)
legislation and the September Guarantee'. Councils also identify
and track young people at risk of, or who are not in education,
employment and training. On the ground, they see a lack of
sufficient and appropriate post-16 education and training provision
and settings. The LGA is already working with DfE, councils and
Strategic Authorities (SAs) to work through statutory duty reforms
set out in the Skills White Paper (2025).
Careers Hubs (co-funded and supported by councils and mayors)
are well placed to promote careers education. The Government's
two-week ambition for work experience (Years 7-11) is ambitious,
and while good work is happening, more resource is required to
strengthen local employer engagement especially in areas with
high numbers of SMEs.
Addressing the high numbers of young people not in education,
employment and training is a national and local priority. This is why
the LGA is engaging with the Milburn investigation. We are keen to
explore how with powers and funding, local government can play a
lead role connecting 16- to 24-year-olds at risk of, or who are, not
in education, employment and training with jobs, learning and
6 of 17
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing I Local Government Association
support they need locally, as set out in LGA's Youth Pathways
Service (https://www.local.gov.uk/publications/work-local-our-
employment-and-skills-offer-new-government-boost-inclusive
-growth-2024#youth-pathways-), part of our wider Work Local
offer to Government. We also need the Government to provide
access to the Youth Guarantee (https://www.gov.uk/governmen
t/news/almost-a-million-young-people-to-benefit-from-expand
ed-support-new-training-and-work-experience-opportunities)
to all areas across England quickly.
3. Sidelined to included
Summary of white paper proposals
This chapter sets out reforms to the system that supports children
and young people with SEND, as well as disadvantaged children
more broadly. The Government has published a separate
consultation on SEND reform: SEND Reform: Putting Children
and Young People First (https://consult.education.gov.uk/send
-strategy-division/send-reform-putting-children-and-young-pe
ople-firs/) which sits alongside this White Paper.
Reforms focus on the creation of a single education system for all
children and young people, with SEND integrated into the
mainstream education system to ensure that support can be
provided earlier. The aim is that commonly-occurring needs can be
consistently met in mainstream education.
For children and young people who need additional help to access
education, support will be organised across two additional layers -
Targeted (including Targeted Plus) and Specialist. Specialist
support will use nationally-defined Specialist Provision Packages
for children with the most complex needs. These will be developed
and reviewed by an independent expert panel.
£1.8 billion is committed over the next three years to enable local
authorities and Integrated Care Boards to establish an 'Experts at
Hand' Offer.
£1.6 billion is committed for a new Inclusive Mainstream Fund over
three years. This new fund will give schools and other education
7 of 17
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing I Local Government Association
settings direct responsibility over funding to empower them to
deliver for children and young people with SEND. This will enable
them to plan proactively and flexibly for commonly-occurring needs
and encourage earlier and more effective support. They will be
able to use this funding, combined with funding for inclusion
already in their budgets, to develop targeted, evidence-based
support offers.
Working with experts, new Specialist Provision Packages will be
introduced which will form the basis for an EHCP. These will be
nationally defined, evidence-based packages of support for
children and young people with the most complex needs.
From now until new legislation begins, the current SEND system -
including all existing duties, rights and funding routes - will remain
in place, and the Government will ensure these duties continue to
be met.
After legislation takes effect, children with an existing EHCP will
have a needs assessment as they approach the end of each
phase of education. All children transitioning from an EHCP to an
Individual Support Plan will retain the right to request a mainstream
placement, and no child will move from a special school or college
unless they choose to do so.
The Government will change the law on independent special
schools to ensure that children get suitable high-quality placements
and that local authorities pay a reasonable price for them.
LGA view
Early years
We welcome the focus on the early years, particularly on ensuring
that the early years workforce have the skills, experience and
knowledge to best support young children and ensure long term
outcomes, as well as work effectively with families. Getting it right
in the early years can have a long term, positive impact on
children's outcomes and this should be embedded across SEND
reform.
An inclusive mainstream system
8 of 17
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing | Local Government Association
The LGA welcomes the proposal to integrate the SEND system
within the mainstream education to ensure that support can be
provided at an earlier stage, reflecting a long-standing LGA ask.
We want to work with children and young people with SEND
themselves, as well as parents and carers and partners in
education and health, including ICBs locally (who are going
through their own reorganisation, which risks their ability to
prioritise supporting children and young people with SEND), to
make this a reality.
The proposed introduction of two layers of additional support within
mainstream, targeted (included targeted plus) and specialist, if
backed by sufficient investment for settings, should help to ensure
that many more children and young people with SEND can have
their needs met quickly and effectively in future, without the need
for a statutory plan.
Ensuring mainstream settings are adequately resourced to meet
the needs of more children and young people with SEND will be
crucial to the success or failure of these reforms. £1.6 billion for
settings over three years from 2026-27 is welcome in supporting
this endeavour, but the Government must commit to monitoring
whether this funding is sufficient to meet changes in need within
mainstream settings and provide assurances that this is 'new'
money.
We support the proposal that every school should be part of a local
grouping to work together on SEND, and that councils have a
central role in shaping these groups within local areas and that
they will not be determined by a school's structural status.
Specialist support
The investment of £1.8 billion over three years to fund the 'Experts
at Hand' programme of specialist support is welcome. We await
further detail on how this funding will be allocated to councils and
ICBs, as well as the conditions that accompany it. We also ask for
confirmation that this is 'new' funding and is not coming from
existing budgets for councils or education. In the meantime, we are
concerned that 'Experts at Hand' could unrealistically raise
9 of 17
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing I Local Government Association
expectations as to the level of support that will be available,
particularly given the time it will take to embed these proposals in
local areas.
We support the development of nationally-defined and evidence-
based Specialist Provision Packages for children with the most
complex needs, which will provide clarity for local education and
SEND systems on how the needs of these children will be met.
Local SEND partnerships
The LGA has long called for the creation of local inclusion
partnerships (https://www.isospartnership.com/s/SEND-repor
t.pdf), and we are therefore supportive of the proposal to
strengthen local SEND strategic partnerships. Councils, with their
democratic mandate, are ideally placed to lead local SEND
systems and hold partners to account for their work in supporting
children and young people with SEND. There must be clarity on
who holds accountability for outcomes and statutory duties where
responsibilities are shared across councils, health and education.
Without that, there is a risk that accountability becomes blurred
while councils retain legal responsibility.
Implementation
Sequencing the proposed reforms, with a focus on building
capacity within settings in advance of legislative change is
welcome, as is the commitment that no child or young person will
move into the new system until 2029-30 at the earliest. It is vital
that children and young people with SEND, and their families, have
confidence that reforms will not be rushed and that there is
capacity within the new system to meet need effectively. It is right
that no child or young person will move from a special placement
unless they choose to do so.
To ensure that councils, working with partners, can focus solely on
meeting the needs of children and young people with SEND
quickly and effectively in a reformed system, the Government must
commit to ensuring that all DSG deficits are written off, ahead of
the statutory override ending in March 2028, as well as providing
10 of 17
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing | Local Government Association
additional funding for home-to-school transport for children and
young people with SEND.
Independent Special Schools
We welcome the proposal to change the law on independent
special schools to ensure that children get suitable high-quality
placements and that councils pay a reasonable price for them.
While we are not opposed to some level of profit being made within
the independent sector, it is right that the Government limits to this
to ensure that limited resources are focussed on meeting the
needs of children and young people. We look forward to working
with Government to develop these proposals further.
4. Withdrawn to engaging
Summary of white paper proposals
This chapter sets out the government's vision for high expectations
for academic excellence and deep pupil engagement to go hand in
hand. It says every school and every classroom should be a safe,
calm and supportive place, where every child feels they belong.
This vision requires strong partnerships between families and
schools, with parents included and engaged in their child's
learning, attendance and behaviour at school - including when
their child moves within the school system.
To help parents to engage, government will give them a more
complete picture of their child's school. By 2029, government
expects every school to monitor pupils' sense of belonging and
engagement so that more children - including those who are
disadvantaged or have SEND - will feel a sense of belonging in
school.
Government will work closely with schools, trusts, local authorities,
communities, families and family-facing organisations to establish
minimum expectations that supports the creation of meaningful
home-to-school partnerships. These principles will make clear what
families can expect from schools, and what schools will expect of
families in return.
11 of 17
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing | Local Government Association
Local authorities, as well as schools, play a critical role in
supporting attendance. The government has been working across
the country to strengthen school attendance support teams and
implement an approach based on 'support first', with most local
authority teams now meeting regularly with schools to agree
individual plans for the most complex cases. Government will
deploy specialist attendance advisers to support and challenge
local authorities with high need, and those deploying innovative
approaches.
Government will reduce the impact on attendance of children
residing in temporary accommodation by providing clearer
guidance, alongside the Ministry of Housing, Communities and
Local Government, to ensure that continued school attendance is a
priority when securing accommodation.
Government will introduce a new duty on councils to notify schools,
health visitors and GPs that a child is in temporary
accommodation. This will help improve partnership working and
ensure services are aware of the household's status, so they are
able to provide appropriate support.
LGA view
The White Paper recognises the crucial role of councils in
supporting schools to encourage high attendance, and it is positive
that additional support will be provided for attendance advisers that
both support areas with the greatest need and spreads good
practice between areas.
We want to ensure that all children and young people feel
supported to stay in education, particularly if they are in temporary
accommodation. We have been working closely with the
Government on the impact to local services on the new duty to
inform schools and other partners of a children's temporary
accommodation status and will continue to keep this impact under
review.
12 of 17
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing | Local Government Association
5. Support and investment in high-quality staff
Summary of white paper proposals
This chapter sets out the vision for a new model of supporting and
enabling excellence within the system through innovation and
working in genuine partnership with leaders, teachers and support
staff.
It outlines how the Government will support, empower and invest in
expert leaders, teachers and support staff in every school to
ensure a highly trained workforce to deliver for children with
special educational needs and disabilities in their local mainstream
school.
Commitments include improving professional development for staff
at all points in their career and investing in training to ensure that
teachers can identify and meet a broader range of needs, including
the needs of children with SEND, training on inclusion, bringing
forward an offer of a new Teacher Training Entitlement (TTE).
The chapter restates the effort to recruit 6,500 teachers through a
delivery plan which includes optimising inclusive routes into
teaching, improving teaching experience and boosting retention,
and developing and expanding career-long development
opportunities.
The government will fund schools to improve maternity pay,
doubling the period of full pay from the current offer of 4 weeks to 8
weeks for school teachers and leaders from the 2027/28 academic
year.
Alongside this, the government will provide funding for school
support staff and will remit the new School Support Staff
Negotiating Body (SSSNB) to negotiate an equivalent
improvement to maternity pay for support staff in its first year of
operation.
The chapter restates the commitment to ensuring that new
teachers have or are working towards achieving Qualified Teacher
Status.
The government will continue our work to reform statutory pay and
conditions for teachers and leaders and will remove the ceiling on
13 of 17
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing | Local Government Association
pay.
LGA view
The increase to maternity pay is a significant change to terms and
conditions. We welcome the principle and government commitment
to funding that increase to maternity pay and look forward to better
understanding the detail sitting behind that funding, and discussing
via National Employers Organisation for School Teachers
(NEOST), how those terms and conditions are to be amended.
We recognise this government's priority in restoring the SSSNB
and are keen to ensure associated risks, such as those relating to
equal pay are mitigated and all costs associated with the body met
by central government.
We note the commitment to lifting the ceiling on pay and
understand the rationale behind this. That said, we remain keen to
avoid unevenly driving up pay creating a disadvantage for schools
with greater funding challenges and look forward to working with
DfE to mitigate that risk.
6. Collaboration between schools and with other partners
Summary of white paper proposals
This chapter sets out plans to put collaboration at the heart of the
system by moving to all schools joining or forming high-quality
school trusts, including enabling new local authority established
trusts.
School trusts created by local authorities will deepen collaborative
partnerships that have developed in the maintained sector by
bringing them into the shared governance and accountability
structure of a trust. Government knows that there is excellent
school improvement work already being delivered in many parts of
the country, including through school companies and other forms of
partnership, and wants to see these grow and flourish through the
school trust system.
Recognising the pivotal role of local authorities in safeguarding,
supporting, and promoting the welfare of all children in their area,
the Government will strengthen and clarify how local authorities
14 of 17
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing | Local Government Association
and school trusts should work together, building on best practice
from existing place-based partnerships. The chapter makes clear
that local authorities - through their statutory duties, democratic
mandate and geographic scale - are well placed to play a
proactive leadership role.
High-quality trusts must be rooted in their communities to play their
part as civic institutions. Government will expect all school trusts to
look outwards with purpose, to share expertise, and support others
to improve. This includes embedding collaboration into the
standards required of trusts and the Government will encourage
school trusts to report on how they have supported stronger
outcomes in their community role through annual public benefit
reporting. Once established, the government will hold school trusts
to account for this role through trust inspection.
LGA view
We support the ambition to widen and deepen collaboration
between schools to strengthen school improvement and, as the
White Paper recognises, excellent school improvement work is
already being delivered in the council-maintained sector in many
parts of the country, including through school companies and other
forms of partnership.
We welcome the proposal to enable councils to establish school
trusts. However, there is no detail on how the intention of "moving
to all schools joining or forming high-quality school trusts" is to be
achieved. We believe that it should be open to schools to choose
to become an academy and join a trust but would not want to see
compulsion. Other models of collaboration should be permitted if
they are successful at delivering school improvement.
We await further details on how the Government will move schools
into high-quality trusts, but are concerned that further structural
change will need to be carefully managed when set against the
Local Government Reorganisation agenda, as well as reforms to
ICBs, children's social care, early years and SEND.
15 of 17
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing I Local Government Association
7. Enabling innovation and ambition
Summary of proposals
This chapter sets out the government's ambition for innovation to
be a defining feature of a school system that delivers for every
child, including the development of safe, evidence-based and
innovative EdTech and AI products.
Government will expect all Al tools used by schools to meet high
standards of safety and quality and will work to support the
development and trialling of AI tutoring tools for secondary school
children.
Government will work with industry to drive adoption of national
standards and digital National Curriculum to improve the safety
and quality of tools.
Government will invest an additional £23 million to expand the
EdTech Impact Testbed pilot into a 4-year programme and develop
our wider research strategy to understand the effects of Al on
learning and wellbeing.
LGA view
We support the proposal to make a self-improving school system a
reality. Councils are strong supporters of a school-led improvement
system. As mentioned previously, the White Paper recognises
excellent school improvement work is already being delivered in
the council-maintained sector in many parts of the country,
including through school companies and other forms of
partnership.
The deployment of AI tools in schools creates immediate
obligations for councils around procurement governance,
algorithmic assurance and equalities compliance. The LGA has
called for a consistent responsible buying framework for AI and for
mandatory third-party supplier assurance, noting that councils
currently carry out assurance processes themselves with no
standardised approach. Any AI tool used for SEND identification
under the new Individual Support Plan must comply with data
protection regulations and the Public Sector Equality Duty,
16 of 17
4/11/26, 4:08 PM
Schools White Paper, Every child achieving and thriving - LGA briefing I Local Government Association
including assessing risks of discriminatory or biased outcomes.
Schools and councils should follow the LGA's Responsible Buying
of AI guidance, developed with the ICO and EHRC, to ensure
transparent, legally compliant procurement.
The White Paper introduces a new statutory duty on all nurseries,
schools and colleges to record SEND needs in Individual Support
Plans. The new £1.8bn Experts at Hand multi-agency service will
create significant new data flows between councils, schools and
NHS Integrated Care Boards. Current EHCP and case
management systems are unlikely to be ISP-ready without
upgrade or replacement. Data Sharing Agreements with ICB
partners must be developed, and legal advice sought on data
controller status as the trust landscape changes.
Digital inclusion is a cross-cutting risk across the White Paper's
reforms that requires a co-ordinated local response. The White
Paper's ambitions assume digital access and literacy that is not
equally distributed across communities or in council areas. Unless
addressed proactively, the reforms risk deepening existing
inequalities rather than reducing them.
The LGA has identified digital exclusion as a key risk in the AI and
digital transformation agenda and has called for stronger central-
local partnerships to deliver equitable digital infrastructure. The
LGA has also recommended that councils' role in community
engagement on digital access be formally recognised in the
Government's Al Opportunities Action Plan implementation.
17 of 17
