Department
for Education
Schools:
guide to the 0 to 25
SEND code of
practice
Advice for school governing
bodies/proprietors, senior leadership
teams, SENCOs and classroom staff
September 2014
Contents
Foreword
3
About this guide
4
Context
5
Principles underlying the Code
6
Working together across education, health and care for joint outcomes
7
The Local Offer
8
Improving outcomes - high aspirations and expectations for children with SEN
10
Identifying SEN in schools
12
SEN support in schools
15
Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years
21
Education, health and care needs assessments and plans
25
Children and young people in specific circumstances
29
Resolving disagreements
32
Useful resources
33
2
Foreword
Our vision for children with special educational needs and
disabilities is the same as for all children - that they
achieve well in their early years, at school and college,
make a good transition to adulthood and lead contented
and fulfilled lives.
The current system is not working for all families. The
reforms introduced by the Children and Families Act 2014
aim to change this, with a focus on greater co-operation
between education, health and social care and a greater
focus on the outcomes which will make a real difference to
how a child or young person lives their life.
Schools are vital to the success of these changes and to achieving our vision for a new
system. Currently, too many children and young people do not get the support they need
and support does not focus sufficiently on helping them to achieve their goals, including
paid employment and independent living. With the right support and high aspirations, the
vast majority of children and young people who have SEN or disabilities can achieve well
and make a successful transition into adulthood, whether into employment, further or
higher education or training.
Building on best practice, the 0-25 SEND Code of Practice sets clear expectations on
schools to deliver a whole school approach to SEN, with good quality teaching as a first
response and a clear focus on outcomes. Teachers are at the heart of the new SEN
support system, supported by the strategic role of SENCOs, with strong leadership from
head teachers and governors.
For the reforms to achieve a real impact, it's about long-term culture change, about
having a workforce which is confident and skilled and about children and young people
with SEN and disabilities having a real voice.
This guide to the Code will help you understand what your duties are under the Children
and Families Act 2014 and help you navigate the full 0-25 SEND Code of Practice. It will
ensure you are doing everything you should be and everything you can, to improve
outcomes for this group of children and young people.
Sched.
EDWARD TIMPSON
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State
for Children and Families
3
About this guide
This guide is designed to help those listed below to understand their statutory duties and
responsibilities under the reforms in the Children and Families Act 2014 in relation to
children in their care who have or may have special educational needs or disabilities
(SEND):
Governing bodies of schools, including non-maintained special schools
Proprietors of academies (including free schools, University Technical Colleges
and Studio Schools)
The management committees of pupil referral units
Independent schools and independent specialist providers approved under
Section 41 of the Children and Families Act 2014
In this guide 'schools' refers to all of the above, unless otherwise stated.
This guide (and the full Code of Practice) is also relevant for school leadership teams,
SEN co-ordinators (SENCOs) and all classroom teachers, since it is they who will have
the most day-to-day contact with pupils who have SEN or disabilities and will be
responsible for delivering programmes of support for them. It is important that the entire
school community understands the reforms in the 0-25 SEND Code of Practice and
adopts a 'whole school' approach to supporting pupils who have SEN or disabilities.
The guide draws out elements of the full 0-25 SEND Code of Practice that relate to
schools, as well as wider aspects that all those who work with children and young people
with SEN or disabilities and their families should have regard to.
This document is not a substitute for the full Code of Practice and has no statutory basis.
The main duties that schools must have regard to are highlighted here and links are
given to the relevant sections of the Code - it is important that schools familiarise
themselves with the full version of the statutory guidance in the Code in addition to
reading this guide.
Expiry or review date
This guide will be kept under review and updated when necessary.
4
Context
The Children and Families Act 2014 provides, from September 2014, for:
a clear and transparent 'Local Offer' of services across education, health and
social care with children, young people and parents involved in preparing and
reviewing it
services across education, health and care to be jointly commissioned
Education, Health and Care (EHC) plans to replace statements and Learning
Difficulty Assessments (LDAs) with the option of a Personal Budget for families
and young people who want one
new statutory rights for young people in further education, including the right to
request a particular institution is named in their EHC plan and the right to appeal
to the First-tier Tribunal (SEN and Disability), and
a stronger focus on preparing for adulthood, including better planning for transition
into paid employment and independent living and between children's and adults
services
From 1 September 2014 transitional arrangements will be in place to support the
changeover from the current system in a phased and ordered way, to facilitate the
transfer of those with statements of special educational needs to EHC plans. It is
expected that all those who have a statement, and who would have continued to have
one under the current system, will be transferred to an EHC plan - no-one should lose
their statement and not have it replaced with an EHC plan simply because the system is
changing.
A child or young person has SEN if they have a learning difficulty or disability which calls
for special educational provision to be made for him or her. Children and young people
who have SEN may also have a disability under the Equality Act 2010. Where a child or
young person is covered by SEN and disability legislation, reasonable adjustments and
access arrangements should be considered as part of SEN planning and review.
More information on the background to the SEN reforms is given in the Introduction to
the 0-25 SEND Code of Practice.
5
Principles underlying the Code
The 0-25 SEND Code of Practice describes the principles that should be observed by all
professionals working with children and young people who have SEN or disabilities.
These include:
taking into account the views of children, young people and their families
enabling children, young people and their parents to participate in decision-making
collaborating with partners in education, health and social care to provide support
identifying the needs of children and young people
making high quality provision to meet the needs of children and young people
focusing on inclusive practices and removing barriers to learning
helping children and young people to prepare for adulthood
More information on the principles that underpin the Children and Families Act and the
guidance is given in Chapter 1, Principles, in the 0-25 SEND Code of Practice.
6
Working together across education, health and care for
joint outcomes
Under Section 25 of the Children and Families Act 2014, local authorities have a duty to
ensure integration between educational provision and training provision, health and
social care provision where this would promote wellbeing and improve the quality of
provision for disabled children and young people and those with SEN. This requires close
co-operation with education, health and social care partners to research, plan,
commission and review services.
These duties on local authorities are reciprocal - education, health and social care
partners also have a duty to co-operate with the local authority on planning,
commissioning and reviewing local services. For schools, this will involve contributing to
the educational provision described in the local authority's Local Offer (see below), and
will also involve taking part in wider strategic planning for education in the local area.
Some schools may act as commissioners of services for students with SEN or disabilities
in their own right. This could include services such as speech and language therapy,
pastoral care or counselling services. Joint commissioning arrangements should reflect
this local commissioning and should ensure that services commissioned by schools are
suitably supported to deliver positive outcomes for children and young people.
More information about joint commissioning is given in Chapter 3, Working together
across education, health and care for joint outcomes, in the 0-25 SEND Code of Practice.
7
The Local Offer
Local authorities have a statutory duty to develop and publish a Local Offer, setting out in
one place information about the support they expect to be available in their area across
education, health and social care for children and young people in their area who have
SEN or are disabled, including those who do not have EHC plans.
The Local Offer has two key purposes:
To provide clear, comprehensive, accessible and up-to-date information about the
available provision and how to access it, and
To make provision more responsive to local needs and aspirations by directly
involving disabled children and those with SEN and their parents, and disabled
young people and those with SEN, and service providers in its development and
review
Local authorities and their partner bodies and agencies, including schools, must co-
operate with each other in the development and review of the Local Offer. This is
essential so that the Local Offer provides a comprehensive, transparent and accessible
picture of the range of services available.
The Local Offer must include, amongst other information, the following:
special educational, health and social care provision for children and young people
with SEN or disabilities - this should include online and blended learning
other educational provision, for example sports or arts provision, paired reading
schemes
arrangements for resolving disagreements and for mediation, and details about
making complaints
arrangements for travel to and from schools
support to help children and young people move between phases of education (for
example from early years to school, from primary to secondary)
8
Schools will need to co-operate with the local authority to help it fulfil its duty to develop
and publish in the Local Offer an authority-wide description of the special educational and
training provision it expects to be available in schools in the. They should also have the
opportunity to take part in the regular review of the Local Offer that the local authority has
a duty to undertake, in order to identify gaps in provision and ensure that the Local Offer
is responsive to the needs of local children, young people and their families.
More information about the Local Offer is available from Chapter 4, The Local Offer, in
the 0-25 SEND Code of Practice.
9
Improving outcomes - high aspirations and
expectations for children with SEN
All children and young people should expect to receive an education that enables them to
achieve the best possible educational and other outcomes, and become confident, able
to communicate their own views and ready to make a successful transition into
adulthood, whether into employment, further or higher education or training.
Underpinning this are a range of statutory duties on schools, described below.
All mainstream schools have a duty to use their best endeavours to provide support to
children and young people with SEN, whether or not they have an EHC plan. They must
designate a teacher to be responsible for co-ordinating SEN provision (the SEN co-
ordinator or SENCO) and must inform parents when they are making special educational
provision for a child.
Mainstream schools must ensure that children and young people with SEN can take part
in the activities of the school alongside those who do not have SEN, and maintained
schools and academies must make arrangements to support those who have medical
conditions (see the statutory guidance 'Supporting pupils at school with medical
conditions').
All pupils should have access to a broad and balanced curriculum. Careful planning of
lessons to address potential areas of difficulty and to remove barriers to pupil
achievement will mean that, in many cases, pupils with SEN and disabilities will be able
to study the full curriculum.
All schools have duties under the Equality Act 2010 towards individual disabled children
and young people. They must make reasonable adjustments, including the provision of
auxiliary aids and services for disabled children, to prevent them being put at a
substantial disadvantage. These duties are anticipatory - they require thought to be
given in advance to what disabled children and young people might require and what
adjustments might need to be made to prevent that disadvantage. Schools also have
wider duties to prevent discrimination, to promote equality of opportunity and to foster
good relations.
There should be a member of the school's governing body or a sub-committee with
specific oversight of the school's arrangements for SEN and disability. School leaders
should regularly review how expertise and resources used to address SEN can be used
to build the quality of whole-school provision as part of their approach to school
improvement.
Maintained schools and academies must prepare an SEN information report (see
under SEN support in schools below) and their arrangements for the admission of
disabled children, the steps being taken to prevent disabled children from being treated
10
less favourably than others, the facilities provided to enable access to the school and
their accessibility plan showing how they plan to improve access progressively over time.
Maintained schools and Pupil Referral Units (PRUs) must ensure that pupils from Year 8
until Year 13 are provided with independent careers guidance. Academies are subject to
this duty through their funding agreements.
More information on these duties is given in Chapter 6, Schools, in the 0-25 SEND Code
of Practice.
11
Identifying SEN in schools
All schools should have a clear approach to identifying and responding to SEN. The
benefits of early identification are widely recognised - identifying need at the earliest
point and then making effective provision improves long-term outcomes for the child or
young person.
A pupil has SEN where their learning difficulty or disability calls for special educational
provision, namely provision different from or additional to that normally available to pupils
of the same age. Making higher quality teaching normally available to the whole class is
likely to mean that fewer pupils will require such support. Such improvements in whole-
class provision tend to be more cost effective and sustainable.
Under the provisions of the Children and Families Act 2014, the designations of School
Action and School Action Plus have been replaced by SEN support, a graduated
approach to supporting pupils with SEN or disabilities. This change will be reflected in the
School Census.
Schools should assess each pupil's current skills and levels of attainment on entry,
building on information from previous settings and key stages where appropriate. At the
same time, schools should consider evidence that a pupil may have a disability under the
Equality Act 2010 and, if so, what reasonable adjustments may need to be made for
them.
Class and subject teachers, supported by the senior leadership team, should make
regular assessments of progress for all pupils. These should seek to identify pupils
making less than expected progress given their age and individual circumstances. This
can be characterised by progress which:
is significantly slower than that of their peers starting from the same baseline
fails to match or better the child's previous rate of progress
fails to close the attainment gap between the child and their peers
widens the attainment gap
It can include progress in areas other than attainment - for instance where a pupil needs
to make additional progress with wider development or social needs in order to make a
successful transition to adult life.
Where a pupil is making less progress than expected, the first response to such progress
should be high quality teaching targeted at their areas of weakness. Where progress
continues to be less than expected the class or subject teacher, working with the
SENCO, should assess whether the child has SEN. While informally gathering evidence
(including the views of the pupil and their parents) schools should not delay in putting in
12
place extra teaching or other rigorous interventions designed to secure better progress,
where required. The pupil's response to such support can help identify their particular
needs.
For some children, SEN can be identified at an early age. However, for other children
and young people difficulties become evident only as they develop. All those who work
with children and young people should be alert to emerging difficulties and respond early.
In particular, parents know their children best and it is important that all professionals
listen and understand when parents express concerns about their child's development.
They should also listen to and address any concerns raised by children and young
people themselves.
Persistent disruptive or withdrawn behaviours do not necessarily mean that a child or
young person has SEN. Where there are concerns, there should be an assessment to
determine whether there are any causal factors such as undiagnosed learning difficulties,
difficulties with communication or mental health issues. If it is thought housing, family or
other domestic circumstances may be contributing to the presenting behaviour a multi-
agency approach, supported by the use of approaches such as the Early Help
Assessment, may be appropriate. In all cases, early identification and intervention can
significantly reduce the use of more costly intervention at a later stage.
Professionals should also be alert to other events that can lead to learning difficulties or
wider mental health difficulties, such as bullying or bereavement. Such events will not
always lead to children having SEN but it can have an impact on well-being and
sometimes this can be severe. Schools should ensure they make appropriate provision
for a child's short-term needs in order to prevent problems escalating. Where there are
long-lasting difficulties schools should consider whether the child might have
SEN. Further guidance on dealing with bullying issues can be found on the GOV.UK
website.
Slow progress and low attainment do not necessarily mean that a child has SEN and
should not automatically lead to a pupil being recorded as having SEN. However, they
may be an indicator of a range of learning difficulties or disabilities. Equally, it should not
be assumed that attainment in line with chronological age means that there is no learning
difficulty or disability. For example, some children and young people may be high
achieving academically, but may require additional support in communicating and
interacting socially. Some learning difficulties and disabilities occur across the range of
cognitive ability and, left unaddressed may lead to frustration, which may manifest itself
as disaffection, emotional or behavioural difficulties.
Identifying and assessing SEN for children or young people whose first language is not
English requires particular care. Schools should look carefully at all aspects of a child or
young person's performance in different areas of learning and development or subjects to
establish whether lack of progress is due to limitations in their command of English or if it
13
arises from SEN or a disability. Difficulties related solely to limitations in English as an
additional language are not SEN.
When reviewing and managing special educational provision there are four broad areas
of need and support which give an overview of the range of needs that should be
planned for, and schools should review how well equipped they are to provide support
across these areas. They are:
Communication and interaction
Cognition and learning
Social, emotion and mental health difficulties
Sensory and/or physical needs
There is a wide range of information available on appropriate interventions for pupils with
different types of need, and associated training which schools can use to ensure they
have the necessary knowledge and expertise to use them. Links to organisations that
provide this information are given under Useful resources at the end of this guide.
More information on identifying children and young people who have SEN and on the
four broad areas of need are given in Chapter 6, Schools, in the 0-25 SEND Code of
Practice (paragraphs 6.14 to 6.35).
14
SEN support in schools
Teachers are responsible and accountable for the progress and development of the
pupils in their class, including where pupils access support from teaching assistants or
specialist staff. High quality teaching, differentiated for individual pupils, is the first step in
responding to pupils who have or may have SEN.
As noted in the previous section, School Action and School Action Plus have been
replaced by SEN support, a graduated approach to supporting children and young people
with SEN.
Deciding whether to make special educational provision
In deciding whether to make special educational provision, the teacher and SENCO
should consider all of the information gathered from within the school about the pupil's
progress, alongside national data and expectations of progress. This should include high
quality and accurate formative assessment, using effective tools and early assessment
materials. For higher levels of need, schools should have arrangements in place to draw
on more specialised assessments from external agencies and professionals.
This information gathering should include an early discussion with the pupil and their
parents. These early discussions with parents should be structured in such a way that
they develop a good understanding of the pupil's areas of strength and difficulty, the
parents' concerns, the agreed outcomes sought for the child and the next steps. A short
note of these early discussions should be added to the pupil's record on the school
information system and given to the parents. Schools should also tell parents and young
people about the local authority's information, advice and support service.
Defining desired outcomes
Consideration of whether special educational provision is required should start with the
desired outcomes, including the expected progress and attainment and the views and
wishes of the pupil and their parents. This should then help determine the support that is
needed and whether it can be provided by adapting the school's core offer or whether
something different or additional is required.
More detailed information on what constitutes good outcome setting is given in Chapter
9, Education, Health and Care needs assessments and plans, of the 0-25 SEND Code of
Practice (paragraphs 9.64 to 9.69). These principles should be applied to planning for all
children and young people with SEN. From Year 9 onwards, the nature of the outcomes
will reflect the need to ensure young people are preparing for adulthood.
The outcomes considered should include those needed to make successful transitions
between phases of education and to prepare for adult life. Schools should engage with
secondary schools or further education providers as necessary to help plan for these
15
transitions (see Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years). The agreed actions may
also include those taken to make sure the school meets its duty to ensure that pupils with
SEN engage in school activities together with those who do not have SEN.
However support is provided, a clear date for reviewing progress should be agreed and
the parent, pupil and teaching staff should each be clear about how they will help the
pupil reach the expected outcomes. The overriding purpose of this early action is to help
the pupil achieve the identified outcomes and remove any barriers to learning. Where it is
decided that a pupil does have SEN, the decision should be recorded in the school
records and the pupil's parents must be formally informed that special educational
provision is being made. Arrangements for appropriate support should be made through
the school's approach to SEN support.
SEN support - the graduated approach
Where a pupil is identified as having SEN, schools should take action to remove barriers
to learning and put effective special educational provision in place. This SEN support
should take the form of a four-part cycle (assess, plan, do, review) through which earlier
decisions and actions are revisited, refined and revised with a growing understanding of
the pupil's needs and of what supports the pupil in making good progress and securing
good outcomes. This is known as the graduated approach. It draws on more detailed
approaches, more frequent review and more specialist expertise in successive cycles in
order to match interventions to the SEN of children and young people. More information
on each stage of the graduated approach is given in Chapter 6, Schools, in the 0-25
SEND Code of Practice (paragraphs 6.45 to 6.56).
Parents should be fully aware of the planned support and interventions and, where
appropriate, plans should seek parental involvement to reinforce or contribute to progress
at home. Parents should also be involved in reviews of support provided to their child and
have clear information about the impact of the support and interventions, enabling them
to be involved in planning next steps
Planning for transition
SEN support should include planning and preparation for the transitions between phases
of education and preparation for adult life (see Preparing for adulthood from the earliest
years). To support transition, the school should share information with the school, college
or other setting the child or young person is moving to. Schools should agree with
parents and pupils the information to be shared as part of this planning process. Where a
pupil is remaining at the school for post-16 provision, this planning and preparation
should include consideration of how to provide a high quality study programme.
16
Involving specialists
Where a pupil continues to make less than expected progress, despite evidence-based
support and interventions that are matched to the pupil's areas of need, the school
should consider involving specialists, including those secured by the school itself or from
outside agencies. This could include, for example, speech and language therapists,
specialist teachers for the hearing or vision impaired, occupational therapists or
physiotherapists. Schools may involve specialists at any point to advise them on early
identification of SEN and effective support and interventions. The pupil's parents should
always be involved in any decision to involve specialists. The involvement of specialists
and what was discussed or agreed should be recorded and shared with the parents and
teaching staff supporting the child in the same way as other SEN support.
The SENCO and class teacher, together with the specialists, and involving the pupil's
parents, should consider a range of evidence-based and effective teaching approaches,
appropriate equipment, strategies and interventions in order to support the child's
progress. They should agree the outcomes to be achieved through the support, including
a date by which progress will be reviewed.
Requesting an Education, Health and Care needs assessment
SEN support should be adapted or replaced depending on how effective it has been in
achieving the agreed outcomes. Where, despite the school having taken relevant and
purposeful action to identify, assess and meet the SEN of the child or young person, the
child or young person has not made expected progress, the school or parents should
consider requesting an Education, Health and Care needs assessment (see Education,
health and care needs assessments and plans). To inform its decision the local authority
will expect to see evidence of the action taken by the school as part of SEN support. A
school may make a request for an assessment in the case of the very small minority of
children and young people who may have such significant needs that the school
considers it impossible or inappropriate to carry out its full chosen assessment procedure
without immediate specialist assessment and interventions which it is unable to provide.
Involving parents and pupils in planning and reviewing
progress
Schools must provide an annual report for parents on their child's progress. Most
schools will want to go beyond this and provide regular reports for parents on how their
child is progressing.
Where a pupil is receiving SEN support, schools should talk to parents regularly to set
clear outcomes and review progress towards them, discuss the activities and support that
will help achieve them, and identify the responsibilities of the parent, the pupil and the
school. Schools should meet parents at least three times each year.
17
The views of the pupil should be included in these discussions. This could be through
involving the pupil in all or part of the discussion itself, or gathering their views as part of
the preparation.
A record of the outcomes, action and support agreed through the discussion should be
kept and shared with all the appropriate school staff. This record should be given to the
pupil's parents. The school's management information system should be updated as
appropriate.
Use of data and record keeping
It is for schools to determine their own approach to record keeping in line with the
requirements of the Data Protection Act 1998. The provision made for pupils with SEN
should be recorded accurately and kept up to date. As part of any inspection, Ofsted will
expect to see evidence of pupil progress, a focus on outcomes and a rigorous approach
to the monitoring and evaluation of any SEN support provided. Ofsted publish more detail
about their expectations in their inspection guidelines. More information on record
keeping and provision management is given in Chapter 6, Schools, in the 0-25 SEND
Code of Practice (paragraphs 6.72 to 6.78).
SEN information report
The governing bodies of maintained schools and maintained nursery schools and the
proprietors of academy schools must publish information on their websites about the
implementation of the governing body's or the proprietor's policy for pupils with SEN. This
information can be included as part of the school's overall SEN policy and does not need
to be a separate document. The information published should be updated annually and
any changes to the information occurring during the year should be updated as soon as
possible. Details of the information required are given in Chapter 6, Schools, in the 0-25
SEND Code of Practice (paragraph 6.79).
Schools should ensure that the information is easily accessible by young people and
parents and is set out in clear, straightforward language. It should include information on
the school's SEN policy and named contacts within the school for situations where young
people or parents have concerns. It should also give details of the school's contribution to
the Local Offer and must include information on where the local authority's Local Offer is
published.
In setting out details of the broad and balanced curriculum provided in each year, schools
should include details of how the curriculum is adapted or made accessible for pupils with
SEN.
Schools should also make any data it collects on the levels and types of need within the
school available to the local authority. This data will be required to inform local strategic
planning of SEN support, and to enable the local authority to identify pupils who have or
18
may have SEN. Such data, as collected through the School Census, is also required to
produce the national SEN information report.
Role of the SENCO
Governing bodies of maintained mainstream schools and the proprietors of mainstream
academy schools (including free schools) must ensure that there is a qualified teacher
designated as SENCO for the school.
The SENCO must be a qualified teacher working at the school. A newly appointed
SENCO must be a qualified teacher and, where they have not previously been the
SENCO at that or any other relevant school for a total period of more than twelve
months, they must achieve a National Award in Special Educational Needs Co-ordination
within three years of appointment.
A National Award must be a postgraduate course accredited by a recognised higher
education provider. The National College for Teaching and Leadership has worked with
providers to develop a set of learning outcomes (see the References section under
Chapter 6 for a link). When appointing staff or arranging for them to study for a National
Award schools should satisfy themselves that the chosen course will meet these
outcomes and equip the SENCO to fulfil the duties outlined in this Code. Any selected
course should be at least equivalent to 60 credits at postgraduate study.
The SENCO has an important role to play with the headteacher and governing body, in
determining the strategic development of SEN policy and provision in the school. They
will be most effective in that role if they are part of the school leadership team.
The SENCO has day-to-day responsibility for the operation of SEN policy and co-
ordination of specific provision made to support individual pupils with SEN, including
those who have EHC plans. The key duties of the SENCO are outlined in Chapter 6,
Schools, in the 0-25 SEND Code of Practice (paragraph 6.90).
The SENCO provides professional guidance to colleagues and will work closely with
staff, parents and other agencies. The SENCO should be aware of the provision in the
Local Offer and be able to work with professionals providing a support role to families to
ensure that pupils with SEN receive appropriate support and high quality teaching.
The school should ensure that the SENCO has sufficient time and resources to carry out
these functions. This should include providing the SENCO with sufficient administrative
support and time away from teaching to enable them to fulfil their responsibilities in a
similar way to other important strategic roles within a school.
It may be appropriate for a number of smaller primary schools to share a SENCO
employed to work across the individual schools, where they meet the other requirements
set out in this chapter of the Code. Schools can consider this arrangement where it
secures sufficient time away from teaching and sufficient administrative support to enable
19
the SENCO to fulfil the role effectively for the total registered pupil population across all
of the schools involved.
Where such a shared approach is taken the SENCO should not normally have a
significant class teaching commitment. Such a shared SENCO role should not be carried
out by a headteacher at one of the schools.
Schools should review the effectiveness of such a shared SENCO role regularly and
should not persist with it where there is evidence of a negative impact on the quality of
SEN provision, or the progress of pupils with SEN.
Funding for SEN support
All mainstream schools are provided with resources to support those with additional
needs, including pupils with SEN and disabilities. Most of these resources are
determined by a local funding formula, discussed with the local schools forum, which is
also applied to local academies. School and academy sixth forms receive an allocation
based on a national funding formula.
Schools have an amount identified within their overall budget, called the notional SEN
budget. This is not a ring-fenced amount, and it is for the school to provide high quality
appropriate support from the whole of its budget.
It is for schools, as part of their normal budget planning, to determine their approach to
using their resources to support the progress of pupils with SEN. The SENCO,
headteacher and governing body or proprietor should establish a clear picture of the
resources that are available to the school. They should consider their strategic approach
to meeting SEN in the context of the total resources available, including any resources
targeted at particular groups, such as the pupil premium.
This will enable schools to provide a clear description of the types of special educational
provision they normally provide and will help parents and others to understand what they
can normally expect the school to provide for pupils with SEN.
Schools are not expected to meet the full costs of more expensive special educational
provision from their core funding. They are expected to provide additional support which
costs up to a nationally prescribed threshold per pupil per year. The responsible local
authority, usually the authority where the child or young person lives, should provide
additional top-up funding where the cost of the special educational provision required to
meet the needs of an individual pupil exceeds the nationally prescribed threshold.
More information on schools' duties and responsibilities in relation to children and young
people with SEN or disabilities is given in Chapter 6, Schools, in the 0-25 SEND Code of
Practice.
20
Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years
Everyone working with children and young people who have SEN or disabilities should
support them to prepare for adult life and help them go on to achieve the best outcomes
in employment, independent living, health and community participation.
Starting early
When a child is very young, or SEN is first identified, families need to know that the great
majority of children and young people with SEN or disabilities, with the right support, can
find work, be supported to live independently, and participate in their community. Health
workers, social workers, early years providers and schools should encourage these
ambitions right from the start. They should seek to understand the interests, strengths
and motivations of children and young people and use this as a basis for planning
support around them.
Schools should support children and young people so that they are included in social
groups and develop friendships. This is particularly important when children and young
people are transferring from one phase of education to another (for example, from
nursery to primary school). Maintained schools must ensure that, subject to certain
conditions, pupils with SEN engage in the activities of the school together with those who
do not have SEN, and are encouraged to participate fully in the life of the school and in
any wider community activity.
Support from Year 9 onwards (age 13-14)
High aspirations about employment, independent living and community participation
should be developed through the curriculum and extra-curricular provision. Schools
should seek partnerships with employment services, businesses, housing agencies,
disability organisations and arts and sports groups, to help children understand what is
available to them as they get older, and what it is possible for them to achieve. It can be
particularly powerful to meet disabled adults who are successful in their work or who
have made a significant contribution to their community.
Preparing for adulthood reviews
Preparing for adulthood should form part of the planning for all children and young people
with SEN and disabilities, right from the earliest years. However, for teenagers
preparation for adult life needs to be a more explicit element of their planning and
support. Discussions about their future should focus on what they want to achieve and
the best way to support them to achieve. For children and young people with EHC plans,
local authorities must ensure that the EHC plan review at Year 9, and every review
thereafter, includes a focus on preparing for adulthood. Information about what should be
included in preparing for adulthood reviews is given in Chapter 8, Preparing for adulthood
from the earliest years, in the 0-25 SEND Code of Practice (paragraphs 8.11 to 8.14).
21
Young people's right to make their own decisions
After compulsory school age (the end of the academic year in which they turn 16) the
right to make requests and decisions under the Children and Families Act 2014 applies to
young people directly, rather than to their parents. Parents, or other family members, can
continue to support young people in making decisions, or act on their behalf, provided
that the young person is happy for them to do so, and it is likely that parents will remain
closely involved in the great majority of cases.
This is particularly important for young people under 18 and schools would normally
involve parents or family members where they have concerns about a young person's
behaviour or welfare. They should also continue to involve parents or family members in
discussions about the young person's studies where that is their usual policy. The fact
that the Children and Families Act 2014 gives rights directly to young people from the
end of compulsory school age does not necessitate any change to a school's
safeguarding or welfare policy.
Planning the transition into post-16 education and training
Young people entering post-16 education and training should be accessing provision
which supports them to build on their achievements at school and which helps them
progress towards adulthood. Young people with EHC plans are likely to need more
tailored post-16 pathways.
It is important that information about previous SEN provision is shared with the further
education or training provider. Schools should share information before the young person
takes up their place, preferably in the spring term prior to the new course, so that the
provider can develop a suitable study programme and prepare appropriate support.
Schools and colleges should work in partnership to provide opportunities such as taster
courses, link programmes and mentoring which enable young people with SEN to
familiarise themselves with the college environment and gain some experience of college
life and study.
For children and young people with EHC plans, discussions about post-16 options will be
part of the preparing for adulthood focus of EHC plan reviews, which must be included as
part of the review from Year 9 (age 13-14). The local authority must ensure these reviews
take place, and schools must co-operate with the local authority in these reviews. If it is
clear that a young person wants to attend a different school (sixth form) or a college, then
that school or college must co-operate, so that it can help to shape the EHC plan, help to
define the outcomes for that young person and start developing a post-16 study
programme tailored to their needs.
22
Careers advice for children and young people
Maintained schools and pupil referral units (PRUs) have a statutory duty under section
42A of the Education Act 1997 to ensure pupils from Year 8 until Year 13 are provided
with independent careers guidance. Academies, including 16-19 academies, and free
schools are subject to this duty through their Funding Agreements.
Schools should raise the career aspirations of students with SEN and broaden their
employment horizons. They should use a wide range of imaginative approaches, such as
taster opportunities, work experience, mentoring, exploring entrepreneurial options, role
models and inspiring speakers.
High quality study programmes for pupils with SEN
All pupils aged 16-19 should follow a coherent study programme which provides stretch
and progression and enables them to achieve the best possible outcomes in adult life.
Schools are expected to design study programmes which enable pupils to progress to a
higher level of study than their prior attainment, take rigorous, substantial qualifications,
study English and maths, participate in meaningful work experience and non-qualification
activity. They should not be repeating learning they have already completed successfully.
For pupils who are not taking qualifications, their study programme should focus on high
quality work experience, and on non-qualification activity which prepares them well for
employment, independent living, being healthy adults and participating in society. Full
guidance about study programmes is available on the GOV.UK website.
Pathways to employment
All young people should be helped to develop the skills and experience, and achieve the
qualifications they need, to succeed in their careers. The vast majority of young people
with SEN are capable of sustainable paid employment with the right preparation and
support. All professionals working with them should share that presumption. One of the
most effective ways to prepare young people with SEN for employment is to arrange
work-based learning that enables them to have first-hand experience of work, such as
apprenticeships, traineeships and supported internships. More information about
pathways to employment for children and young people who have SEN or disabilities is
given in Chapter 8, Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years, in the 0-25 SEND
Code of Practice (paragraphs 8.33 to 8.40).
Transition to higher education
Securing a place in higher education is a positive outcome for many young people with
SEN or a disability. Where a young person has this ambition, the right level of provision
and support should be provided to help them to achieve that goal, wherever possible.
23
Leaving education or training
All young people with SEN should be supported to make the transition to life beyond
school or college, whether or not they have an EHC plan. As well as preparing them for
adulthood generally, schools should ensure that young people with SEN have the
information they need to make the final steps in this transition. This includes information
about local employers, further training, and where to go for further advice or support.
For young people with EHC plans, where it is known that a young person will soon be
completing their time in education and training, the annual review prior to ceasing the
EHC plan should be used to agree the support and specific steps needed to help the
young person to engage with the services and provision they will be accessing once they
have left education, and the school should contribute to this review.
More information about helping young people to prepare for adulthood is in Chapter 8,
Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years, in the 0-25 SEND Code of Practice.
24
Education, health and care needs assessments and
plans
Schools must co-operate with local authorities in carrying out needs assessments for
pupils, and in the development and review of EHC plans. They also have a duty to admit
a young person to the school if it is named in their EHC plan and to provide the
educational support specified in the plan.
EHC needs assessments
Where, despite the school having taken relevant and purposeful action to identify, assess
and meet the SEN of a child or young person, the child or young person has not made
expected progress, the school or the child's parents could consider asking the local
authority to carry out an Education, Health and Care (EHC) needs assessment.
During the course of an EHC needs assessment, the local authority must gather advice
from relevant professionals about the young person's education, health and care needs,
desired outcomes and special educational, health and care provision that may be
required to meet the identified needs and achieve desired outcomes. The school should
co-operate with the local authority in this, by providing the educational advice and
information requested.
Being named in an EHC plan
The child's parent or the young person has the right to request a particular school to be
named in their EHC plan. This can be a maintained school, any form of academy or free
school (mainstream or special), a non-maintained special school, or an independent
school or independent special school (where they have been approved by the Secretary
of State for this purpose under Section 41 of the Children and Families Act 2014). The
local authority must consult the governing body of that school about admitting the child or
young person and to name the school in the EHC plan, unless:
it would be unsuitable for the age, ability, aptitude or SEN of the child or young
person, or
the attendance of the child or young person there would be incompatible with the
efficient education of others or the efficient use of resources
The local authority must consider the comments of the school carefully before deciding to
name it in an EHC plan. Once the school is named in the EHC plan, it must admit the
child or young person.
The child's parent or the young person may also make representations for a place at an
independent school that is not on the list of schools approved by the Secretary of State
under Section 41 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and the local authority must
consider their request. The local authority is not under the same conditional duty to name
25
the school but must have regard to the general principle in section 9 of the Education Act
1996 that children should be educated in accordance with their parents' wishes, so long
as this is compatible with the provision of efficient instruction and training and does not
mean unreasonable public expenditure. The local authority should be satisfied that the
school would admit the child or young person before naming it in a plan since these
providers are not subject to the duty to admit a child or young person even if named in
their plan.
Providing the support specified in the EHC plan
Section F of the EHC plan specifies the special educational provision required by the
young person in order to ensure it meets their needs and will help them to achieve their
desired outcomes. The local authority must make sure this support is provided. The
school will have been involved in the development or review of the EHC plan to
determine what can be provided from within the school's own resources and what will
require additional external expertise or further funding from the local authority.
Some of the provision specified may be procured by the child's parent or the young
person using a Personal Budget, including by a direct payment. Where a direct payment
is to be used to deliver provision on the school premises, the local authority must seek
the agreement of the school for this arrangement through a formal written notice.
Reviewing an EHC plan
Local authorities have a duty to review EHC plans as a minimum every twelve months,
and schools must co-operate in these reviews. Reviews must focus on the child or young
person's progress towards achieving the outcomes specified in the EHC plan and must
also consider whether these outcomes and supporting targets remain appropriate.
Reviews of EHC plans must include a focus on preparing for adulthood and transition
planning must be built into the plan. In particular, where a young person is nearing the
end of their time in formal education and the plan is likely to be ceased within the next 12
months, the annual review should consider good exit planning.
The local authority can require a maintained school, non-maintained special school,
academy, alternative provision academy, PRU school or independent school approved
by the Secretary of State under Section 41 of the Children and Families Act 2014 to
convene and hold the review meeting on their behalf. In most cases, reviews should
normally be held at the educational institution attended by the child or young person.
Reviews are generally most effective when led by the educational institution. They know
the child or young person best, will have the closest contact with them and their family
and will have the clearest information about progress and next steps. Reviews led by the
educational institution will engender the greatest confidence amongst the child, young
person and their family.
26
The child's parents or the young person, a representative of the school or other institution
attended, a local authority SEN officer, a health service representative and a local
authority social care representative must be invited and given at least two weeks' notice
of the date of the meeting. Other individuals relevant to the review should also be invited,
including youth offending teams and job coaches where relevant.
The school must seek advice and information about the child or young person prior to the
meeting from all parties invited, and send any advice and information gathered to all
those invited at least two weeks before the meeting.
The meeting must focus on the child or young person's progress towards achieving the
outcomes specified in the EHC plan, and on what changes might need to be made to the
support that is provided to help them achieve those outcomes, or whether changes are
needed to the outcomes themselves. Children, parents and young people should be
supported to engage fully in the review meeting.
The school must prepare and send a report of the meeting to everyone invited within two
weeks of the meeting. The report must set out recommendations on any amendments
required to the EHC plan, and should refer to any difference between the school or other
institution's recommendations and those of others attending the meeting.
Transfer between phases of education
An EHC plan must be reviewed and amended in sufficient time prior to a child or young
person moving between key phases of education, to allow for planning for and, where
necessary, commissioning of support and provision at the new institution.
The review and any amendments must be completed by 15 February in the calendar
year of the transfer at the latest for transfers into or between schools. The key transfers
are:
early years provider to school
infant school to junior school
primary school to middle school
primary school to secondary school, and
middle school to secondary school
For young people moving from secondary school to a post-16 institution or
apprenticeship, the review and any amendments to the EHC plan - including specifying
the post-16 provision and naming the institution - must be completed by the 31 March in
the calendar year of the transfer.
27
Preparing for adulthood reviews
All reviews taking place from year 9 at the latest and onwards must include a focus on
preparing for adulthood, including employment, independent living and participation in
society. This transition planning must be built into the EHC plan and where relevant
should include effective planning for young people moving from children's to adult care
and health services. It is particularly important in these reviews to seek and to record the
views, wishes and feelings of the child or young person. The review meeting organiser
should invite representatives of post-16 institutions to these review meetings, particularly
where the child or young person has expressed a desire to attend a particular institution.
Review meetings taking place in year 9 should have a particular focus on considering
options and choices for the next phase of education.
As the young person is nearing the end of their time in formal education and the plan is
likely to be ceased within the next 12 months, the annual review should consider good
exit planning. Support, provision and outcomes should be agreed that will ensure the
young person is supported to make a smooth transition to whatever they will be doing
next - for example, moving on to higher education, employment, independent living or
adult care.
More information on EHC plans is given in Chapter 9, Education, Health and Care needs
assessments and plans, in the 0-25 SEND Code of Practice.
28
Children and young people in specific circumstances
There are particular groups of children and young people whose specific circumstances
require additional consideration by those who work with them and support their SEN,
including schools.
Looked after children
Children who are being accommodated, or who have been taken into care, by a local
authority are legally defined as being 'looked after' by the local authority. Around 70% of
looked after children have some form of SEN, and it is likely that a significant proportion
of them will have an EHC plan.
All maintained schools and academies and free schools must appoint a Designated
Teacher for looked after children. Where that role is carried out by a person other than
the SEN Co-ordinator (SENCO), Designated Teachers should work closely with the
SENCO to ensure that the implications of a child being both looked after and having SEN
are fully understood by relevant school staff.
Local authorities must promote the educational achievement of the children they look
after, regardless of where they are placed. The Children and Families Act 2014 requires
every local authority to appoint an officer who is an employee of that or another authority
to discharge that duty. This officer, often known as a Virtual School Head (VSH) will lead
a virtual school team, which tracks the progress of children looked after by the authority
as if they attended a single school.
Children and young people with SEN educated at home
Under section 7 of the Education Act 1996 parents have the right to educate children,
including children with SEN, at home. Where a child or young person is a registered pupil
and the parent decides to home educate, the parent must notify the school in writing that
the child or young person is receiving education otherwise than at school and the school
must then remove the pupil's name from the admission register. If the school is a special
school, the local authority must give consent for the child's name to be removed, but this
should not be a lengthy or complex process. There is no provision in law for a 'trial
period' of home education.
Children with SEN who are in alternative provision
Local authorities must make arrangements where, for any reason, a child of compulsory
school age would not otherwise receive suitable education. Suitable education means
efficient education suitable to a child or young person's age, ability and aptitude and to
any SEN he or she may have. This education must be full-time, unless the local authority
determines that, for reasons relating to the physical or mental health of the child, a
reduced level of education would be in the child's best interests.
29
Where this education is arranged elsewhere than at a school it is commonly referred to
as alternative provision. Alternative provision includes pupil referral units, alternative
provision academies and alternative provision free schools. Schools may commission
alternative provision for children and young people who face barriers to participation in
mainstream education or training. Alternative provision must be arranged in line with a
child or young person's EHC plan. Where a child or young person in alternative provision
has SEN that are not specified in an EHC plan then the alternative provider should
employ a graduated response to these needs (see the section on SEN support in schools
in this guide).
Children of Service personnel
The Children's Education Advisory Service (CEAS) within the Ministry of Defence
provides advice and guidance to Service parents, educational establishments and local
authorities on educational issues relating to Service children, including issues relating to
SEN.
Children whose parent(s) are Service personnel may face difficulties that are unique to
the nature of their serving parent's employment. These needs may arise from:
service-induced mobility: Service personnel may relocate more often than the
rest of the population and, sometimes, at short notice. Such transitions should
be well managed to avoid Service children with SEN experiencing delays in
having their needs assessed and met
the deployment of serving parents to operational arenas, while not constituting
SEN in itself, may result in a Service child experiencing anxiety, dips in
educational performance and/or emotional difficulties. Children may also be
affected similarly by siblings' deployment
In having regard to this Code of Practice and in meeting the aspirations of the Armed
Forces Covenant, which attempts to eliminate or mitigate some of the potential
disadvantages faced by Service families, all those with statutory responsibilities towards
Service children with SEN should ensure that the impact of their policies, administrative
processes and patterns of provision do not disadvantage such children because of their
Service-related lifestyle.
In respect of Service children, schools and other education providers should:
ensure that mechanisms are in place to enable effective and timely receipt and
dispatch of all relevant records for Service children with SEN moving between
schools in the UK and overseas, to enable effective planning, ideally in advance
of the child's arrival in school. Maintained schools must transfer information,
including SEN information, about pupils to other schools in the UK (maintained
or independent) in accordance with the Education (Pupil Information)
30
Regulations 2005. To support the transfer of information on Service children
with SEN the MoD has developed the Pupil Information Profile for Service
children, which includes details of a child's SEN. It is available for use by
schools across the UK and overseas and is available from the Children's
Education Advisory Service (CEAS) on the GOV.UK website
ensure that all reviews for Service children with SEN explicitly consider those
Service-related issues (for example, Service-induced mobility) relevant to the
outcomes of those reviews
ensure that access to appropriate assessments, interventions and provision is
determined solely on the nature, severity and complexity of the needs
presented by Service children with SEN and not related to the amount of time
they have left in a particular school
consider how any funds received through the Service Pupils' Premium might be
used to improve their overall approaches to meeting the SEN of Service
children
More information on children whose specific circumstances may affect their SEN or
disability is available from Chapter 10, Children and young people in specific
circumstances, in the 0-25 SEND Code of Practice.
31
Resolving disagreements
All state-funded schools are required to have a procedure to deal with complaints and to
publish details of their procedure. This does not include complaints relating to EHC plans,
which pupils and their families should take up with the local authority that issued the plan.
The governing bodies of maintained schools should make efforts to ensure that anyone
who wishes to make a complaint, including a complaint in relation to children and young
people with SEN, whether they have EHC plans or not, is treated fairly, given the chance
to state their case, provided with a written response (including the rationale for any
decisions) and informed of their appeal rights. If the complainant remains concerned after
following the local complaints procedure, he or she could ask the Department for
Education's School Complaints Unit to take up the matter.
Further details on making complaints to the Department about schools are available from
the GOV.UK website.
The proprietors of academies, free schools and independent schools must, under the
Education (Independent School Standards) Regulations 2010, ensure that a complaints
procedure is drawn up which is in writing and is made available to parents. The
procedure must allow for a complaint to be considered informally in the first instance and
then, if the parent remains dissatisfied, there should be a formal procedure for the
complaint to be made in writing. If the parent is still dissatisfied the complaint can then be
heard in front of a panel of at least three people one of whom must be independent of the
management and running of the school. Should the parent still not be satisfied they can
complain, in the case of academies and free schools, to the Education Funding Agency
(EFA) acting on behalf of the Secretary of State, or, in the case of independent schools,
to the Secretary of State directly. Both the EFA and the Secretary of State will look at
whether the school handled the complaint properly, rather than the substance of the
complaint. Further details on making a complaint to the EFA about academies and free
schools are also available at the weblink given in the previous paragraph.
Schools complaints procedures are available for use in relation to children and young
people who have SEN, but do not have EHC plans.
Further information about complaints is given in Chapter 11, Resolving disagreements, in
the 0-25 SEND Code of Practice.
32
Useful resources
Legislation and statutory guidance
0-25 Special Educational Needs and Disability Code of Practice
Children and Families Act 2014
Education Act 1996
Equality Act 2010
Special Educational Needs (Personal Budgets) Regulations 2014
Special Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014
Other Government information
Bullying guidance
Education Funding Agency (EFA)
First-tier Tribunal (Special Educational Needs and Disability)
Mental Health and Behaviour in Schools Guidance
National Award for SENCO Co-ordination: learning outcomes
Participation of young people in education, employment and training (DfE guidance)
Pathfinder information packs
Preparing for Adulthood
Provision mapping resources
Reasonable adjustments for disabled pupils 2012
Social Care for Deafblind Children and Adults guidance 2009 (DoH)
Supporting pupils at school with medical conditions
Working Together to Safeguard Children 2013
33
Best practice examples/websites
Achievement for All
Autism Education Trust
Communication Trust
Council for Disabled Children
Dyslexia SpLD Trust
I CAN - the children's communications charity
MindEd
nasen
National Sensory Impairment Partnership
SEND Gateway
34
Department
for Education
© Crown copyright 2014
You may re-use this document/publication (not including logos) free of charge in any
format or medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence v2.0. Where we
have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission
from the copyright holders concerned.
To view this licence:
visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/2
email
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk
About this publication:
enquiries www.education.gov.uk/contactus
download www.gov.uk/government/publications
Reference: DFE-00558-2014
Follow us on
f
Like us on Facebook:
Twitter: @educationgovuk
facebook.com/educationgovuk
35
