HM Government
Special Educational
Needs and Disabilities
(SEND) and
Alternative Provision (AP)
Improvement Plan
Right Support, Right Place, Right Time
March 2023
CP 800
PENSENT
DIEUS
ET MON
Special Educational Needs
and Disabilities (SEND) and
Alternative Provision (AP)
Improvement Plan
Right Support, Right Place, Right Time
Presented to Parliament
by the Secretary of State for Education
by Command of His Majesty
March 2023
CP 800
OGL
© Crown copyright 2023
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0
except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit
nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/S
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to the Department for Education
at www.education.gov.uk/contactus.
ISBN 978-1-5286-3924-8
E02864447
03/23
Printed on paper containing 40% recycled fibre content minimum
Printed in the UK by the APS Group on behalf of the Controller of
His Majesty's Stationery Office
Contents
Table of figures
2
Ministerial Foreword
3
Executive Summary
5
Chapter 1: Introduction
15
Chapter 2: A national system underpinned by National Standards
21
Chapter 3: Successful transitions and preparation for adulthood
44
Chapter 4: A skilled workforce and excellent leadership
52
Chapter 5: Strengthened accountabilities and clear routes of redress
70
Chapter 6: A financially sustainable system delivering improved outcomes
81
Conclusion
91
Annex A - Consultation response summary
92
Annex B - The government's vision for the Special Educational Needs and
Disabilities (SEND) and Alternative Provision (AP) system and delivery approach
94
Annex C - The future Special Educational Needs and Disabilities (SEND) and
Alternative Provision (AP) system
96
1
Table of figures
Figure 1: A vicious cycle of late intervention, low confidence and inefficient
resource allocation
16
Figure 2: A three-tier model for alternative provision
25
Figure 3: National Standards
26
2
Ministerial Foreword
Children only get one childhood.
They deserve to get the support
they need to thrive and prepare for
happy, healthy and productive
adulthoods. For children and young
people with special educational
needs and disabilities (SEND), or
in alternative provision, this is
especially vital.
There is much to celebrate about the SEND system: many children and young people with
SEND, from birth to 25, receive excellent support from thousands of dedicated education,
health and care staff. 89% of state-funded special schools and 87% of state-funded
alternative provision schools are graded outstanding or good by Ofsted¹.
However, we know from listening to children, young people and families that significant
issues remain. We know that some families feel frustrated by the system and feel they
need to battle to access specialist education, health or care services including from mental
health services. We know that providers and services are facing delivery pressures.
It is time to deliver a more dignified experience for children and young people with SEND
and to restore families' confidence in the system.
The SEND and Alternative Provision Green Paper, published in March 2022 alongside the
Schools White Paper, set out bold proposals to deliver a generational change for a more
inclusive system.
With earlier identification and evidence-based provision, delivered through new National
Standards, more children and young people with SEND will fulfil their potential and be set
up for long-term success.
Throughout the consultation, we heard from thousands of children and young people,
families, those working in education, health, social care, and local government, as well as
the voluntary and community sector. Thank you for taking the time to share your views.
In many cases, the proposals set out in the green paper were welcomed. Typically, people
agreed with our assessment of the current challenges in the system. There was broad
support for the proposal for a new national SEND and alternative provision system that
delivers timely, high-quality services and support in mainstream settings, alongside swift
access to more local state specialist settings, where required.
1 State-funded schools inspections and outcomes as at 31 August 2022, Ofsted, November 2022
3
We also heard, particularly from parents, some concerns about whether proposals could
make it harder to meet the individual needs of children and young people. Our ambition for
this set of proposals is to create a sustainable SEND and alternative provision system that
is easier for families to navigate. We want parents to have confidence that their child's
needs will be met consistently and effectively as a result of earlier identification and
evidence-based support.
This Improvement Plan draws on the rich feedback we heard from children and young
people with SEND, their families and others. It is aligned with other reform programmes
that we are taking forward to improve outcomes and experiences for all children and young
people across education and care, including the Children's Social Care Implementation
Strategy and the upcoming Academies Regulation and Commissioning Review.
Concerted action is needed, including a period of designing and testing proposals to
ensure they deliver for children and families. There are also steps we can all take in the
short term to support and stabilise the system and address the immediate issues that
exist, especially in the challenging economic climate we currently face.
Our Plan will be overseen by our respective departments through a new National SEND
and Alternative Provision Implementation Board jointly chaired by the Minister for Children,
Families and Wellbeing and the Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for Mental Health
and Women's Health Strategy.
The steps in this Plan cannot be delivered by government alone and local system leaders
can start now in learning from and adopting good practice from elsewhere. We ask that
you join with us to rise to the challenge, and we look forward to working with you to deliver
a single national system that delivers consistently for every child and young person with
SEND and in alternative provision.
Jen
Gillian Keegan
Steve Barclay
Secretary of State for Education
Secretary of State for Health and Social Care
4
Executive Summary
1. The SEND and Alternative Provision Green Paper explored the issues present within
the current SEND system. It set out the government's proposals to improve outcomes
for children and young people; improve experiences for families, reducing the current
adversity and frustration they face; and deliver financial sustainability. It also
considered the specific issues facing the alternative provision sector. This is because
82% of children and young people in state-place funded alternative provision have
identified special educational needs (SEN)², and it is increasingly being used to
supplement local SEND systems.
2. The publication of the green paper marked the start of an extensive 16-week
consultation (see Annex A). We attended 175 events, hearing from over 4,500 people
including children, young people and families. We received around 6,000 responses to
the online consultation, in addition to submissions from organisations and respondents
received directly through email.
Delivering for children and families
3. What we heard through the consultation - particularly from parents and families - gives
us confidence to establish a new national SEND and alternative provision system with
the mission to:
fulfil children's potential: children and young people with SEND (or attending
alternative provision) enjoy their childhood, achieve good outcomes and are well
prepared for adulthood and employment;
build parents' trust: parents and carers experience a fairer, easily navigable
system (across education, health and care) that restores their confidence that their
children will get the right support, in the right place, at the right time;
provide financial sustainability: local leaders make the best use of record
investment in the high needs budget to meet children and young people's needs
and improve outcomes, while placing local authorities on a stable financial footing.
4. The foundation for the new nationally consistent SEND and alternative provision
system will be new evidenced-based National Standards. Standards will improve early
identification of needs and intervention, and set out clear expectations for the types of
support that should be ordinarily available in mainstream settings. This will give families
and providers clarity, consistency and confidence in the support that is ordinarily
available, in order to be responsive to children's needs. With these expectations, and
improved mainstream provision, more children and young people will receive the
2 Special educational needs in England, Department for Education, 2022
5
support they need through ordinarily available provision in their local setting. Fewer will
therefore need to access support through an Education, Health and Care Plan (EHCP).
5. For those children and young people with SEND who do require an EHCP and
specialist provision, we want to ensure that parents experience a less adversarial
system and restore their trust that their children will get prompt access to the support
they need. We have heard parental concerns about the complexity they need to
navigate in trying to get decisions made and provision agreed, and the frustration they
feel whilst they wait for information to be confirmed and letters to be answered.
Standardised EHCPs will reduce bureaucracy in the system; and alongside this
publication, we are approving a tranche of applications from local authorities to open
new special free schools in their area. We will shortly launch competitions to seek high-
quality proposer groups to run these schools. This is in addition to 92 open special free
schools and a further 49 which are in the delivery pipeline. This will mean that more
children and young people have timely access to sufficient local special school places.
6. We are committed to delivering alternative provision that is fully integrated with the
wider SEND system. Consultation feedback supported this integration and the vision of
alternative provision we set out in the green paper. Respondents recognised the vital
role that alternative provision can play in supporting children and young people to
remain in mainstream education by offering early, targeted support; and in offering
time-limited or transitional places in alternative provision schools for pupils who need
more intensive support. The vast majority of pupils receiving alternative provision also
have SEND, and these services need to be aligned throughout local planning and
delivery. This is why we refer to measures about the 'SEND and alternative provision
system' throughout this Plan, with specific reforms to alternative provision embedded
within individual chapters.
7. We also heard about the growing challenges facing the system. Despite significant
investment, local authority spending continues to outstrip funding. That is why we have
already announced investment to support delivery of this Plan: £400 million of the £2
billion additional funding for schools, announced in the Autumn Statement, will be
allocated to local authorities' high needs budgets in 2023-24. In 2023-24, high needs
funding will be rising to £10.1 billion - an increase of over 50% from the 2019-20
allocations.
8. This extra funding will help local authorities and schools with the increasing costs of
supporting children and young people with SEND. It is clear, though, that more needs
to be done to support and stabilise the system, as we deliver systemic changes to
ensure we have a sustainable and effective system that delivers better outcomes for
children and young people and improved services for families. As this Plan is
implemented, we will carefully monitor the pace of progress towards the mission for the
new national system, to ensure that reforms are working as intended for children and
young people, their parents and families, and all those that work with them.
6
Creating a more inclusive society through a new national
SEND and alternative provision system
9. To fully realise our mission for the new national system, we agree with those
respondents who called for us to seize this moment to reimagine what a more positive
experience for children and young people with SEND and their families should look like
in England (see Annex B). Our vision is to create a more inclusive society that
celebrates and enables success in all forms, with the cultures, attitudes and
environments to offer every child and young person the support that they need to
participate fully, thrive and fulfil their potential. We want the process of identifying
needs and accessing support to be early, dignified and affirmative, focusing on a child
or young person's achievements, talents, and strengths. We also want the process to
be easier to navigate, with parents being clear on what support they can expect for
their child and where they can turn for help, including how to make use of support
through the SEND Local Offer and SEND Information, Advice and Support Services
(SENDIASS).
10. This vision aligns with other key reforms underway across government. The recently
published Children's Social Care Implementation Strategy envisages that every child
and family who need it will have access to high-quality help no matter where they live.
We have worked closely to ensure that the reforms across both SEND and Children's
Social Care align, in recognition of the important overlap between these groups of
children and young people and the services and systems designed to support them.
The upcoming Academies Regulation and Commissioning Review will set out plans to
spread the impact of high-quality multi-academy trusts and incentivise improvement for
all children in all parts of the country, including support for children and young people
with SEND who attend mainstream settings. In addition, a new Disability Action Plan
will be consulted on and published in 2023, setting out the practical action ministers
across government will take over the next two years to improve disabled people's lives.
Delivering National SEND and Alternative Provision Standards
11. In the green paper, we proposed that the new single national SEND and alternative
provision system should deliver consistent, clear and early support for children and
young people with SEND. Through the consultation, we heard that a national system
must give greater clarity to parents about the timely and accurate identification of
needs, and how decisions around support are made from early years to post-16.
Support should be put in place, based on a child or young person's needs, not where
they happen to live, in line with this government's commitment to levelling up.
12. The national system, delivered through the collective impact of the policies set out in
this Plan, will provide greater clarity on evidence-based support, share examples of
best practice, and minimise perverse incentives that can prevent inclusion:
7
For children and young people, this means that they will be able to access and
regularly attend the most appropriate early years setting, school or college for their
needs - be this mainstream or specialist.
For parents and carers, a national system will provide clarity about what support
their children should be receiving without a fight to secure what is appropriate, and
without needing to navigate a complex system. This will increase confidence and, in
turn, minimise disputes.
For providers, it will give them clarity on the support they should be providing, who
should be working together, and will enable government to hold delivery partners to
account and intervene where expectations are not met. It will also provide clarity on
the resources available to deliver the right provision, for example, by ensuring that
the new National SEND and Alternative Provision Standards are clear on which
budgets should be used to provide different types of support.
13. Critically, we agree with what we heard during the consultation: that the national
system should be co-produced with families, children and young people, so we can
build their confidence that the system will meet their needs quickly and effectively. We
are actively engaging with children, young people and families from the earliest stages
of development of the new system.
14. National Special Educational Needs and Alternative Provision Standards
('National Standards') will set clear and ambitious expectations for what good looks like
in identifying and meeting needs, and clarify who is responsible for delivering provision
and from which budgets, across the 0-25 system.
15. With the right resources and accountability in place, our intention as we deliver the new
national system is for children's needs to be identified earlier and met more effectively.
National Standards will place a greater emphasis on the important role mainstream
settings play in providing quality first teaching and evidence-based SEN Support to
meet the needs of the majority of pupils with SEND, so that all settings provide
consistently high-quality provision. By improving early identification and the quality of
SEN Support, we expect to reduce the need for EHCPs because the needs of more
children and young people will be met without them, through ordinarily available
provision. We are committed to working closely with children, young people and their
families when writing the National Standards to ensure that the system is responsive to
individual needs - and based on the latest evidence of what works - within a fair,
consistent and sustainable national system.
16. The delivery of National Standards will be supported by new SEND and alternative
provision practice guides for frontline professionals and an amended SEND Code of
Practice for all system partners (which we will consult on). These will set out the wider
processes and systems to ensure children and young people get the right support, in
the right place, at the right time.
8
17. By the end of 2025, we will publish the first three practice guides focused on advice for
mainstream settings. We will build on existing best practice, such as the Nuffield Early
Language Intervention, the work of the Autism Education Trust, and the government's
guidance on promoting children and young people's mental health and wellbeing. This
will target the greatest areas of need in primary and secondary, as well as supporting
the cross-government focus on improving the mental health of children and young
people. We will identify any gaps in best practice to help build a stronger evidence
base in the long term.
18. As we deliver the new national system, our objective is to ensure that all children's
additional needs are met effectively and quickly within affordable provision, reducing
the need for an EHCP and, where an EHCP is needed, to ensure that parents do not
endure lengthy, adversarial and costly processes. We will judge our success, in part,
by the extent to which we reduce parental complaints about their experiences of the
system and the volume of cases parents take to Tribunal because of the better
services we will deliver through the new national system. This will include swifter, better
responses to parental concerns such as through our proposals for mediation and new
guidance for local authority SEND casework teams, who play a vital role in supporting
families to navigate the system and ensuring they have good experiences.
19. As we develop the National Standards, we will use these as a basis for developing a
national approach to delivering funding bands and tariffs to support
commissioners and providers to meet the expectations set out in the National
Standards.
Delivering a single national SEND and alternative
provision system
20. This Plan sets out how an effective single national system based on the new National
Standards will be delivered locally, through new local partnerships and an improved
EHCP process to ensure that the experience of seeking support at every stage is less
bureaucratic and less adversarial for families and providers alike.
A national system underpinned by National Standards
21. We will:
set up engagement across education, health, and care during spring 2023 to
develop National Standards. This will include parents, carers, children and young
people, strategic leaders, frontline professionals, voluntary sector representatives,
local authorities and cross-government civil servants. This will ensure we consider a
wide range of perspectives, including those with expertise across a broad range of
needs, and in specific settings such as alternative provision, early years, youth
justice and further education.
9
by the end of 2023, start testing some elements of the National Standards with
Regional Expert Partnerships (who will help us co-produce, test and refine key
reforms via the Change Programme).
publish, by the end of 2025, a significant proportion of the National Standards
with a focus on those that are most deliverable in the current system.
introduce local SEND and alternative provision partnerships that bring together
partners to plan and commission support for children and young people with SEND
and in alternative provision, meeting the National Standards.
expect local SEND and alternative provision partnerships to create evidence-
based local inclusion plans that will set out how the needs of children and young
people in the local area will be met in line with National Standards.
develop and spread best practice of partnerships and plans through our
Change Programme, starting with the Regional Expert Partnership areas from
spring 2023.
invest £2.6 billion between 2022 and 2025 to fund new places and improve
existing provision for children and young people with SEND or who require
alternative provision. We are approving a tranche of applications from local
authorities to open new special free schools in their area. We will shortly launch
competitions to seek high-quality proposer groups to run these schools. This is in
addition to 92 open special free schools and a further 49 which are in the delivery
pipeline.
develop innovative approaches for short breaks for children, young people and
their families with £30 million in funding being allocated to new projects over three
years.
review social care legislation relating to disabled children so we can improve
clarity for families about the support they are legally entitled to.
work with stakeholders to deliver a standard EHCP template, with supporting
processes and guidance from 2025. This will include testing the impact of a
consistent approach to supporting local authority decision-making through the use
of multi-agency panels.
develop digital requirements for EHCP systems to improve experiences for
parents, carers and professionals, reduce bureaucracy and improve our ability to
monitor the health of the SEND system.
require local authorities to improve information available to families and provide
a tailored list of suitable settings informed by the local inclusion plan. We will
continue to listen to children, young people, families, SEND sector professionals
and system leaders as we develop and test delivery options through the Change
Programme.
10
create a three-tier alternative provision system, focusing on targeted early
support within mainstream school, time-limited intensive placements in an
alternative provision setting, and longer-term placements to support return to
mainstream or a sustainable post-16 destination.
Successful transitions and preparation for adulthood
22. Our ambition to enable children and young people to fulfil their potential means we
need to place a far greater emphasis on preparation for adulthood. We want to have
high aspirations for children and young people with SEND and in alternative provision,
with smooth transitions into their next step, including further and higher education and
employment.
23. We will:
publish guidance to support effective transitions between all stages of
education, and into employment and adult services.
conduct a pilot to consider the evidence required to access flexibilities to standard
English and mathematics requirements for apprenticeships.
invest £18 million between 2022 and 2025 to double the capacity of the
Supported Internships Programme.
continue to support the Department for Work and Pensions' Adjustments Passport
pilot to smooth the transition into employment.
improve the Disabled Students' Allowance process by continuing to work with
the Student Loans Company to reduce the time for support to be agreed.
Delivering a single national system through three key enablers
24. We agree with the feedback we heard that National Standards, and the single national
system, will not deliver real change for parents and carers on their own. To deliver for
children, young people and their parents, we need a stronger emphasis on improving
the underpinning drivers that will make a national system a reality: a strong and robust
workforce; strengthened accountabilities; and sustainable and fair resourcing. This
Improvement Plan sets out our roadmap for implementing a single, national system
and achieving real change in practice so that every child and young person can thrive.
A skilled workforce and excellent leadership
25. We will:
introduce a new leadership level SENCo (Special Educational Needs
Co-ordinator) NPQ (National Professional Qualification) for schools.
review the Initial Teacher Training and Early Career Frameworks (commencing
early this year).
11
fund up to 5,000 early years staff to gain an accredited Level 3 early years
SENCo qualification to support the early years sector, with training running until
August 2024.
increase the capacity of specialists, including by investing a further £21 million to
train two more cohorts of educational psychologists in the academic years 2024 and
2025; and, in partnership with NHS England, as part of our £70 million Change
Programme, pioneering innovative practice through running Early Language and
Support For Every Child (ELSEC) pathfinders to improve access to speech and
language therapy for those who need it.
work together to take a joint Department for Education and Department of
Health and Social Care approach to SEND workforce planning, including
establishing a steering group in 2023 to oversee this work, which we aim to
complete by 2025.
publish the first three practice guides for frontline professionals, building on
existing best practice, including the Nuffield Early Language Intervention, the work
of the Autism Education Trust, and the government's guidance on promoting
children and young people's mental health and wellbeing.
propose new guidance on delivering a responsive and supportive SEND casework
service to families when consulting on the SEND Code of Practice.
develop a longer-term approach for teaching assistants to ensure their impact is
consistent across the system, starting with a research project to develop our
evidence base on current school approaches, demand and best practice.
strongly encourage the adoption of the DSCO (Designated Social Care
Officer) role in each local area, including by proposing an amendment to the SEND
Code of Practice.
extend funding until March 2025 of the alternative provision
specialist taskforce (APST) pilot programme, which is testing co-location of a
diverse specialist workforce in pilot alternative provision schools.
Strengthened accountabilities and clear routes of redress
26. We will:
publish a local and national inclusion dashboard from autumn 2023 to support
the development of local inclusion plans, giving parents improved transparency of
local performance, informing decision-making and driving self-improvement across
the system with ongoing updates and iterations in response to user feedback.
deliver updated Ofsted and Care Quality Commission (CQC) Area SEND
inspections from 2023 with a greater focus on the outcomes and experience of
children and young people with SEND and in alternative provision.
12
create a ladder of intervention for local areas from 2023, greater powers for the
Secretary of State for Health through the Health and Care Act 2022, and robust
action for all where statutory duties for children and young people with SEND and in
alternative provision are not met, to strengthen accountabilities across all parts of
the system.
require every Integrated Care Board to have a named Executive Board member
lead accountable for SEND.
facilitate a more joined-up response between the Department for Education
and NHS England to improve outcomes and experiences for children and young
people with SEND, including social, emotional and mental health issues, and tackle
systemic failings leading to significant concerns.
strengthen redress for individual disagreements by clarifying who is responsible
for resolving complaints and undertaking further testing of effective mediation
approaches.
set up an expert group to support the development of a bespoke national
alternative provision performance framework.
work with local authority, trust and school leaders to review processes and develop
options for ensuring transparent and effective movement of pupils without
EHCPs, such as those requiring alternative provision, to address behavioural needs.
A financially sustainable system delivering improved outcomes
27. We will:
increase core school funding by £3.5 billion in 2023-24 compared to the year
before, of which almost £1 billion of that increase will go towards high needs. This
means high needs funding will be £10.1 billion in 2023-24.
support local authorities through the Delivering Better Value and the Safety Valve
programmes and share the best practice from local areas with inclusive and
sustainable high needs provision more widely.
develop a system of funding bands and tariffs so that consistent National
Standards are backed by more consistent funding across the country.
publish a response to the consultation on the schools National Funding Formula
in 2023 which includes proposals on funding for SEND, including the notional SEND
budget, and a mechanism for transferring funding to high needs budgets.
develop new approaches to funding alternative provision aligned to their focus
on preventative work with, and reintegration of pupils into, mainstream schools. We
will do this in consultation with mainstream schools, the alternative provision sector
and local authorities.
re-examine the state's relationship with independent special schools to ensure
we set comparable expectations for all state-funded specialist providers.
13
A sustainable system set up for long-term success
28. Our vision is that, once these reforms have been implemented, we will have achieved
the following (see Annex C):
The new national SEND and alternative provision system will be well
established and bring national consistency to the identification of need and
provision of support as set out in the evidence-based National Standards.
The system will be financially sustainable for local authorities with needs routinely
being met effectively where they arise.
Parents have confidence that high-quality teaching and targeted evidence-based
support will be available as a matter of course in mainstream settings when a need
is identified, to avoid needs escalating.
Children and young people can access additional support through a fair and
consistent process where children, young people, families and professionals work
together to put in place the right value-for-money support to meet their needs.
Longer-term proposals, such as options for the tailored list, have been tested, co-
produced and delivered.
Evidence will emerge from Regional Expert Partnerships to support the co-
production of careful and effective improvements to the statutory framework in the
next Parliament.
29. The National SEND and Alternative Provision Implementation Board will publish
updates on progress in delivery against this Plan for children, young people
and parents.
14
Chapter 1: Introduction
1. The SEND and Alternative Provision Green Paper identified 3 key challenges facing
the system:
The system is failing to deliver improved outcomes for children and young
people with SEND. Children and young people with SEND are not consistently
being helped to fulfil their potential.
Parents' confidence in the system is in decline. Too many parents have lost
faith in a system that is not sufficiently responsive to them, which is increasingly
adversarial, and in which they face long waiting times to access information and
support for their children, including accessing therapists and mental health support.
Despite substantial additional investment, the system has become financially
unsustainable. The government has increased investment in high needs by over
50% from 2019-20 to 2023-24, with no marked improvement in outcomes or
experiences.
2. The green paper highlighted that there is a vicious cycle of late intervention, low
confidence and inefficient resource allocation that drives these challenges across the
system. This cycle starts in early years and mainstream settings, where early
identification of needs and provision of support does not happen consistently, despite
the best efforts of the workforce. Children and young people's needs are identified late
or incorrectly, with needs escalating and becoming more entrenched. The
inconsistency across the system means that parents, carers and providers do not know
what to reasonably expect from their local settings, resulting in low confidence in the
ability of mainstream settings to effectively meet the needs of children and young
people with SEND.
3. Due to this low confidence, parents, carers and providers feel they need to secure
EHCPs and, in some cases, specialist provision as a means of guaranteeing support.
This results in further challenges across the system. Parents feel that they have to
navigate long, difficult processes to access information and support. As more children
and young people receive EHCPs to be supported in mainstream and attend specialist
settings, more resource and capacity is pulled to the specialist end of the system.
There is then less resource available to deliver early intervention and effective, timely
support in mainstream settings. As a result, the vicious cycle continues. The
unprecedented investment into the high needs system has not been felt, especially by
families, because outcomes and experiences do not improve.
15
Lack of common
understanding, incentives
and shared priorities to
support children and
young people with SEND
Misaligned
Resources directed
accountabilities, inefficient
from mainstream to fund
use of funding, perverse
increasing numbers of
incentives and delays
individualised placements
in accessing support
with tailored provision
drive poor provision and
escalate costs
Mission: children
and young people
fulfil their potential
and are well prepared
Needs escalate, and
Decision making
for adulthood
families / schools seek
can result in costly
EHCPs and top up
placements
funding to ensure needs
can be met
Lack of confidence,
low inclusivity and
poor experiences in
mainstream fills capacity
for specialist placements
Figure 1: A vicious cycle of late intervention, low confidence and inefficient resource allocation
4. The green paper proposed to improve outcomes and experiences within a fair
and financially sustainable system in five ways:
Creating a single, national SEND and alternative provision system, underpinned by
National SEND and Alternative Provision Standards for identifying and meeting
need from early years to further education, regardless of place or needs.
Improving capacity and expertise in mainstream education from early years to post-
16. This is so that all those working with children and young people with SEND
have the confidence and expertise to do so and can identify additional needs and
access targeted support when this is needed.
Ensuring there is appropriate, high-quality specialist provision for those who need it,
with a clear vision for alternative provision in delivering early intervention.
Identifying clear roles and responsibilities across the system, with strengthened
accountabilities and funding reform to deliver National Standards effectively.
Focusing on effective delivery from the very start and supporting the system to
respond to immediate challenges whilst preparing for longer-term reform.
16
Through the green paper consultation, we listened carefully to the views of many,
including children and young people with SEND or in alternative provision
5. Through the consultation, we wanted to understand whether our proposals would
deliver a system across education, health and care that would deliver improved
outcomes for children and young people, and better experiences for them and their
families. We wanted to understand if the proposals would give families confidence that
their children's needs would be met more consistently and effectively, through earlier
identification and evidence-based support. We thank everyone who took the time to
share their views with us. We have especially listened to the views of children and
young people with SEND and in alternative provision, and their families.
6. The publication of the green paper marked the start of an extensive and accessible 16-
week consultation period:
We attended 175 events, hearing from over 4,500 people, including children, young
people and families.
We received around 6,000 responses to the online consultation questions. These
included 21 specific questions, and a final question that allowed respondents to
share general reflections.
We also received submissions from organisations and respondents directly through
email.
7. An independent report on the consultation feedback, taking account of responses to
the online consultation and feedback received via submissions and emails, has been
produced. This Improvement Plan reflects the feedback that we received through
events, through the online consultation, and through submissions from organisations
and emails.
The sequencing of our proposed reforms is based on consultation feedback
8. We intend to move most quickly on the proposals where consultation feedback gives
us confidence that they have the greatest potential to improve experiences for children,
young people and families, with the lowest risk of unintended consequences.
9. Through our £70 million Change Programme, we will establish up to nine Regional
Expert Partnerships who will help us co-produce, test and refine key reforms. This will
include the establishment of new local SEND and alternative provision partnerships,
agreed local inclusion plans, strengthened accountabilities and new inclusion
dashboards.
10. We will take the time to consider how to deliver those proposals which parents and
those representing children were most concerned about. This is so that children, young
people and their families can be confident that their needs and feedback are at the
heart of any changes. We remain committed to delivering a tailored list of placements
and proposals for mandatory mediation, as well as developing a national system of
17
funding bands and tariffs. However, we recognise the challenges and risks involved in
such a move and will review and test these policies carefully through the Change
Programme to ensure that they work and do not create unintended consequences for
families.
11. We will use the findings from the Change Programme to inform future legislation to
deliver these reforms. This would include new burdens assessments and consideration
of the capacity required to manage the delivery of the reforms.
Delivering improved outcomes in a financially sustainable system
12. Our goal is to achieve an inclusive system that enables children and young people to
fulfil their potential, has parental trust and is financially sustainable. This will be a
system in which local partners work together effectively with families to deliver for
children and young people, with each partner accountable for playing their part. The
right balance will be struck, so that more resources can be dedicated to providing
timely, effective support early and as a matter of course in mainstream settings. This
will reduce the need for as many parents to have to navigate lengthy statutory EHCP
assessment processes.
13. This Improvement Plan sets out the next steps in a multi-year programme to deliver
this improved system. This includes plans to design and test reforms, through our
Change Programme, to inform future choices about delivery and put the system on a
more efficient and financially sustainable footing. We will ensure that the system
delivers effectively throughout this period, and we are taking action now to ensure that
it does. The government has made substantial investment to secure the sustainability
of the system, with the high needs budget rising by more than 50% over 5 years from
2019-20: it will increase to £10.1 billion in 2023-24.
14. Despite this substantial investment, a significant proportion of local authorities have
accumulated Dedicated Schools Grant (DSG) deficits due to high needs block
overspends. The government has recently extended a 'statutory override³ on local
authority DSG deficits for a one-off period of three years (up to March 2026), to give
local authorities the flexibility they need to implement sustainable change.
15. We will continue to work with local authority leaders to ensure that we are all doing
everything possible to ensure high-quality and sustainable systems which are
delivering good value for money. It is important that, when the 'statutory override'
comes to an end in 2026, local authorities are delivering high-quality SEND services for
children, young people, and their families, as well as being in a position to manage
their high needs DSG spending and eliminate accumulated deficits. We will continue to
3 The statutory override treats DSG funding as separate from the general funding of local authorities, and any deficit an
authority may have on its DSG account is kept separate from the authority's revenue account and placed in a separate
account established solely for that purpose. This has recently been extended for a one-off period of three years up to
and including the 2025-26 financial year.
18
support the sector through spreading best practice and disseminating practical lessons
from those authorities that are improving their local service including moving to a more
sustainable position. We will also continue to work with the sector to assess progress
and, if the system is not on track to achieve such financial sustainability, take further
action to ensure that local authorities can and do bring their high needs budgets back
into balance.
16. We have three approaches to delivery:
1 - Support and stabilise: We will support and stabilise the system, getting local
areas working in the best possible way within the current system to ensure that the
needs of children and young people are met, without escalating costs, and to
ensure that local authority deficits are brought under control. This includes
supporting local authorities with financial deficits through the Delivering Better
Value and the Safety Valve programmes. Further information on these
programmes is set out in chapter 6.
2 - Delivering capacity to address supply issues: In the short to medium term, we
will take action to address supply issues - ensuring that there is sufficient support
available for children and young people when they need it, in the most efficient
way. This includes investing £2.6 billion between 2022 and 2025 to deliver new
places and improve existing provision for children and young people with
SEND or who require alternative provision, reducing the need for costly
independent provision.
3 - Design and test for systemic reform: Our £70 million Change Programme will
create up to nine Regional Expert Partnerships that will test and refine longer-
term, systemic reforms including developing and testing National Standards,
strategic partnerships and inclusion plans, the proposed alternative provision
service and tailored lists. This will help guard against unintended consequences
and build a strong evidence base to inform future funding and legislation.
We will monitor progress towards delivering our mission
17. To understand whether the system is delivering on our mission, we would expect to
see the following shifts:
Fulfil children's potential: Better outcomes driven by earlier identification of needs
and evidence-based targeted support to meet needs promptly, including mental
health support. Higher levels of attendance for those with SEN both in more
inclusive mainstream settings and in alternative provision. Improvements in
attainment, with more children identified with SEN and in alternative provision
reaching the expected standard in reading, writing and mathematics at the end of
primary education⁴ and improved GCSE grades in English language and
4
18% of pupils with SEN reached the expected standard in reading, writing and mathematics in 2021/22, compared to
69% of those with no identified SEN, National curriculum assessments at key stage 2, Department for Education, 2022
19
mathematics⁵. For the very small number of children and young people for whom
reaching the expected standard may not be an appropriate aim, we would expect to
see an increase in the progress they make. Better preparation for adulthood at
every age and stage means that those with SEND and in alternative provision are
able to live more fulfilling and independent adult lives with improved employment
outcomes.
Build parents' trust: Families find it easier to navigate the system and access
support. They have greater confidence in it, reporting better experiences of a
system which is based on dignity and affirmation. Mainstream settings are seen as
being high-quality and inclusive, valuing those with SEND. Specialist provision is
seen to be delivering effectively and is available locally to those needing it without
lengthy processes that are difficult to navigate.
Provide financial sustainability: Local systems deploy their resources effectively
such that spending shifts towards early intervention and away from costly specialist
provision, where this is not required. Local authorities operate within their budgets
and achieve value for money so that record investment in the high needs budget is
used effectively and with evidenced outcomes that are financially sustainable. As a
result, local authorities will be able to deliver high-quality services within budgets.
18. The actions we are taking now set a path towards delivering on our mission and we will
monitor progress. As we design and test for systemic reform, using the Change
Programme to help us, we will develop proposals further so that the objectives above
can be achieved. As we do so, we will continue to work with children, young people,
and families so that the proposals are responsive to children's needs, build confidence,
and deliver positive change. In particular, for proposals that require primary legislation,
we will set out further detail for consultation, supported by evidence from the Change
Programme. We want to make sure that with every step we take to implement this
Improvement Plan, we are building confidence that it will work, learning from
experience and hearing the voices of children, young people and families.
5
In 2021/22, 32% of pupils with SEN achieved grades 4 or above in English and mathematics GCSEs, compared to
76% of those with no identified SEN, GCSE and equivalent attainment by pupil characteristics, Department for
Education, 2022
20
Chapter 2: A national system underpinned by
National Standards
1. In the SEND and Alternative Provision Green Paper, the government outlined a vision
for an inclusive education system with excellent mainstream and specialist provision
that puts children and young people first. Through the consultation, we heard that this
approach was welcomed, but we needed to be clearer about what we meant by
inclusion and what it would look like in practice. We also heard, particularly from
parents and organisations supporting families, that we should be more ambitious in
reimagining a society that is inclusive at every level. A society with cultures and
environments that are designed to offer every child and young person the support they
need to fulfil their potential, both within the classroom and beyond.
We will:
set up engagement across education, health and care during spring 2023 to develop
National Standards. This will include parents, carers, children and young people,
strategic leaders, frontline professionals, voluntary sector representatives, local
authorities and cross-government civil servants. This will ensure we consider a wide
range of perspectives, including those with expertise across a broad range of needs,
and in specific settings such as alternative provision, early years, youth justice and
further education.
by the end of 2023, start testing some elements of the National Standards with
Regional Expert Partnerships (who will help us co-produce, test and refine key reforms
via the Change Programme).
publish, by the end of 2025, a significant proportion of the National Standards with a
focus on those that are most deliverable in the current system.
introduce local SEND and alternative provision partnerships that bring together
partners to plan and commission support for children and young people with SEND and
in alternative provision, meeting the National Standards.
expect local SEND and alternative provision partnerships to create evidence-
based local inclusion plans that will set out how the needs of children and young
people in the local area will be met in line with National Standards.
develop and spread best practice of partnerships and plans through our Change
Programme, starting with the Regional Expert Partnership areas from spring 2023.
invest £2.6 billion between 2022 and 2025 to fund new places and improve existing
provision for children and young people with SEND or who require alternative provision.
We are approving a tranche of applications from local authorities to open new special
free schools in their area. We will shortly launch competitions to seek high-quality
proposer groups to run these schools. This is in addition to 92 open special free schools
and a further 49 which are in the delivery pipeline.
develop innovative approaches for short breaks for children, young people and their
families with £30 million in funding being allocated to new projects over three years.
21
review social care legislation relating to disabled children so we can improve clarity
for families about the support they are legally entitled to.
work with stakeholders to deliver a standard EHCP template, with supporting
processes and guidance from 2025. This will include testing the impact of a
consistent approach to supporting local authority decision-making through the use of
multi-agency panels.
develop digital requirements for EHCP systems to improve experiences for parents,
carers and professionals, reduce bureaucracy and improve our ability to monitor the
health of the SEND system.
require local authorities to improve information available to families and provide a
tailored list of suitable settings informed by the local inclusion plan. We will
continue to listen to children, young people, families, SEND sector professionals and
system leaders as we develop and test delivery options through the Change
Programme.
create a three-tier alternative provision system, focusing on targeted early support
within mainstream school, time-limited intensive placements in an alternative provision
setting, and longer-term placements to support return to mainstream or a sustainable
post-16 destination.
A vision for a society where every child and young person
can succeed
A society that celebrates and affirms success
2. Our ambition is to create a society that celebrates, encourages and enables the
success of all children and young people, including those with SEND or in alternative
provision. A society where we hold high aspirations for all children and young people,
recognising that although success looks different for everyone, it is no less worthy of
celebration. A society where navigating systems and accessing support across
education, health and care is dignified, involves children and young people in
decision-making about their own support, and recognises the broad array of strengths
held by children and young people with SEND or in alternative provision. This is a
significant societal change. To achieve this will take time and effort across many
aspects of society, but we are clear that the rewards are significant.
An inclusive system where everyone can thrive
3. Delivering an inclusive society will require improved, high-quality mainstream provision
where children and young people have their needs identified early and can access
prompt, evidence-based, targeted support. This will mean that more children and
young people can have their needs met through ordinarily available provision, without
the need to rely on an EHCP to access the support they need. An inclusive system also
depends upon improved access to timely, high-quality specialist provision, where this is
appropriate for the child or young person, so that every child and young person has
22
access to the resources, information and opportunities that enable them to thrive and
feel a strong sense of belonging. For some children and young people who are falling
behind their peers, high-quality teaching, alongside short-term classroom-based
support will be sufficient to meet their needs without a SEND diagnosis.
4. The Schools White Paper, published in March 2022, set clear expectations about what
high-quality and inclusive mainstream provision entails and its value in supporting all
children and young people to reach their full potential, alongside removing any barriers
that prevent them from engaging in their learning. Across the 0-25 SEND system, such
provision involves fair access, effective central leadership teams, high aspirations for
every child and young person and the use of evidence-based curriculum design and
implementation to facilitate high-quality teaching within calm, safe and supportive
settings. We are continuing this approach and building on the reform set out in the
Schools White Paper through our upcoming plan to increase primary attainment, which
will be published in 2023.
5. In a 0-25 SEND system, we recognise the important role of the early years sector in the
early identification of needs and in building up effective working relationships with
parents about their child's needs. In practical terms, improved mainstream provision
will enable more of the children and young people with SEND in early years, schools
and further education to fully participate within mainstream settings and receive the
additional support they need through ordinarily available provision. The further
education (FE) sector is the launching point into adult life for many young people with
SEND. Staff in FE settings play a crucial role in making sure that young people are
prepared for adulthood and supported to transition to their next stage - whether that's
employment, higher education, or adult services. Children and young people with
SEND and in alternative provision will receive the adaptations and support they need to
attend and engage in early years settings, at school or in college to access the same
benefits of improved attainment and wellbeing as those who do not face the same
barriers to education.
6. The system will provide earlier, more accurate and more consistent identification of
need, targeted support to address those needs and timely access to specialist services
and support, including specialist placements where appropriate. This ambition is based
on evidence that greater inclusion in mainstream settings can improve the academic
achievement for children and young people with SEND and has neutral or small
positive effects on the outcomes of those without SEND. A whole-setting inclusive
ethos improves the sense of belonging for those with SEND and has been found to
increase acceptance of difference amongst peers⁶.
6 Gray, P., Norwich, B., Webster, R. (2021) A review of the evidence on the impact of inclusion on pupils with SEND and
their mainstream peers; Kart, A., & Kart, M. (2021). Academic and social effects of inclusion on students without
disabilities: A review of the literature. Education Sciences, 11(1), 16
23
Case study - King Ecgbert School, Sheffield
King Ecgbert School in Sheffield is a mainstream secondary school and part of the Mercia
Learning Trust. The school aims to be warm, welcoming and inclusive in all senses of the
word, including for its pupils with SEND. It sets inclusion as "everyone's job" - both staff
and pupils.
The school has high expectations for all pupils and strives to ensure that all reach their
potential. Consistent quality-first teaching, as the first step to supporting pupils with SEND,
helps all classrooms at King Ecgbert School to be inclusive and the current continuous
professional development programme for staff is focused on this. The percentage of pupils
at the school with EHCPs is higher than the national average for state-funded mainstream
secondary schools⁷ and the school's Progress 8 score is above the national average⁸.
Some of the school's pupils with EHCPs are attached to its integrated resource for pupils
with autism. The aim is for those pupils to be supported into the mainstream classroom
and able to access the broad curriculum for most of the time (at least 80% of the time) but
also access a parallel curriculum to help them with life skills and emotional regulation.
Tom in the integrated resource, who is going to sit 9 GCSEs this summer and plans to go
on to sixth form to study A levels, said, "the integrated resource has helped me in a variety
of ways. It has supported my mental wellbeing and it also helps me pursue my educational
desires and hopes. The resource is a great place for students like me and I am glad I've
been able to access it."
An integrated SEND and alternative provision system
7. Alternative provision is an important aspect of our reforms and will be used as an
intervention, not a destination. High-quality alternative provision, including for social,
emotional and mental health needs, will create additional capacity for mainstream
school leaders and staff to address challenging behaviour earlier and re-engage pupils
in education. Interventions will be based on a three-tier model with a focus on targeted
support whilst children are in mainstream school, to deal with needs early and reduce
preventable exclusion. Time-limited or transitional placements into an alternative
provision setting will provide more intensive intervention or longer-term support where it
is needed, before these young people return to a new mainstream setting or progress
to a sustainable post-16 destination.
7 Absence and pupil population - King Ecgbert School, Department for Education, 2022
8 Secondary - King Ecgbert School, Department for Education, 2022. Due to the uneven impact of the pandemic on
school and college performance comparisons between schools and colleagues and national averages should be
interpreted with caution.
24
A three-tier model for alternative provision
TIER 1
TIER 2
TIER 3
Targeted support
Time-limited
Transitional
in mainstream
placements
placements
schools
Short-term
Placements in AP
AP specialist early
placements in AP
schools for pupils
interventions and
schools to assess and
who need support
support to help at-
address pupil's needs,
to move on to a new
risk pupils stay in
with the expectation
mainstream school
mainstream school.
of return to their
or sustained post-16
mainstream school.
destination.
Effective reforms would move the system's emphasis
upstream, away from expensive long-term places
Figure 2: A three-tier model for alternative provision
A supportive system for children and families
8. Our vision is echoed in the Children's Social Care Implementation Strategy, which
envisages that every child and family who need it will have access to high-quality help
no matter where they live. Many respondents to the green paper highlighted that the
SEND reforms must also align with reforms to the wider children's social care system
and share a focus on providing help to families early and at the right time. Families
reported barriers to accessing support and experiencing safeguarding-focused
assessments which made them feel criticised and undermined. The Children's Social
Care Implementation Strategy includes a commitment to strengthen the focus on
disabled children's needs in the statutory guidance Working Together to Safeguard
Children. The proposed update to this guidance will also focus on the role of education
settings, further strengthening links between education and social care for children and
young people with SEND.
9. Although some families with disabled children are fully supported by universal services,
many children with SEND, and their families, benefit from expert help and support
when it is first needed. For help to be effective, it must be offered without stigma or
criticism, in recognition of the fact that parenting a disabled child can be challenging
and families may need additional support to access services which enable them to
thrive. We know that there are areas where we need to do more to ensure there is
coherency so that reforms make the children's social care and SEND systems easier to
navigate for children and families. We will work with all partners in the system,
including children, young people and their families, and across government, to ensure
25
that at every level there is sustained and considered join up between children's social
care and the SEND system.
National SEND and Alternative Provision Standards
10. The consultation feedback is clear that while respondents supported a more inclusive
and consistent mainstream system that worked for all children and young people, with
a dedicated role for alternative provision, aspects of the current system need to change
for that vision to be fully realised. We need to address the 'postcode lottery' of SEND
and alternative provision support that exists currently. Children, young people and their
families do not know what to reasonably expect, settings are ill-equipped to support
needs and needs are identified late or incorrectly.
11. We heard during the consultation that respondents wanted more detail on what the
standards are, who they are for and how they will work in practice. This included
greater clarity on what should be ordinarily available in every nursery, school, and
college, as well as from health and social care. Children and young people told us that
it would be good for schools to know what they must deliver. We have used this
feedback to develop the next layer of detail for the National SEND and Alternative
Provision Standards ('National Standards').
National Standards will clarify:
What types of support should be made
available, based on evidence of what works
Whose job it is to make different types
of provision available
Which budgets should be used to pay
for support
Figure 3: National Standards
12. To deliver our vision of an inclusive society for all, the National Standards will set clear
and ambitious expectations for what good looks like in identifying and meeting a range
of needs. They will provide clarity for children, young people and their families on what
provision should be available through ordinarily available provision and for those with
EHCPs. National Standards will clarify what good evidence-based provision looks like,
who is responsible for securing it and from which budgets. This will help families,
practitioners and providers understand what support every child or young person
should be receiving from early years through to further education, no matter where they
live or what their needs are. This section details our plan to develop these standards,
including how we will work with partners in the system such as children, young people
26
and their families and test proposals through the Change Programme's Regional
Expert Partnerships.
13. The National Standards will set out what provision system leaders, such as multi-
academy trust leaders, governing bodies, headteachers, college principals and chief
executive officers (CEOs), directors of children's services and Integrated Care Boards,
need to make available for all children with SEND in every local area, nursery, school
and college. We intend to underpin the standards with legislation for education at the
earliest opportunity to facilitate intervention in education settings if standards are not
met. This will allow us to set out the provision, resources, policies and training that
must be available across local areas and in education settings. As we develop the
standards, we will undertake new work to consider how to design accountability
mechanisms to ensure the government's expectations are met, including considering
the role of Ofsted and the Care Quality Commission (CQC). When National Standards
are delivered, this will mean every child and young person will have access to
consistently high-quality and evidence-led support.
14. National Standards will cover the evidence-based approaches to identification and
intervention for those with SEN Support and for those with EHCPs. For example,
standards will set out how nurseries, schools and colleges must adapt the physical and
sensory environment of the setting to enable children and young people with SEND to
learn alongside their peers and the role of the local authority in supporting this. This will
build on existing best practice, such as Portsmouth City Council's Ordinarily Available
Provision, which sets out expectations of the support that should be made available for
children and young people with SEND in early years, schools and colleges. This will
help children, young people and their families understand what support they can expect
to receive. Clear standards for universal and SEN Support provision will enable better
accountability at this stage, whilst ensuring that those who need it receive high-quality
specialist support. This will help children, young people, and their families understand
what support they can expect to receive.
15. During the consultation, organisations raised concerns that the individual needs of a
child or young person could be overlooked in the move towards a single, national
system. National Standards will help ensure every child and young person, regardless
of where they live, receives consistent high-quality support, at both SEN Support level
and for those with EHCPs. We recognise that every child or young person with SEND
or in alternative provision will have unique needs and these will depend on their
personal circumstances and backgrounds. We are committed to working closely with
children, young people and their families when writing the National Standards to find a
balance between national consistency and individual needs.
27
16. In the green paper, we committed to producing an amended version of the SEND Code
of Practice. We will ensure the National Standards and amended SEND Code of
Practice support one another, so that any new legislation is explained in a clear and
accessible way for all. We will consult on an amended version of the SEND Code of
Practice and work with individuals and organisations across the system to prepare
recommendations for the update, including considering how we reflect wider reforms to
alternative provision.
17. To equip frontline professionals, such as teachers and early years practitioners, with the
skills and expertise to make best use of provision and to identify needs early, accurately
and consistently, we will produce a suite of SEND and alternative provision practice
guides. We have set out our plans to develop practice guides in chapter 4 as part of our
commitment to building SEND skills and knowledge, prioritising areas such as speech
and language development, autism and social, emotional and mental health.
18. Together, the National Standards, practice guides and amended version of the
SEND Code of Practice will set clear and consistent expectations for what should be
ordinarily available for all children, young people and their families, from early years
to further education.
19. When the National Standards are delivered effectively, every leader will be bought into
a shared vision for how needs should be identified and supported, whether at the
universal, targeted, or specialist level and there will be clarity on how support should be
paid for, supporting financial sustainability. This will include a clear role for alternative
provision across three tiers of support, with a focus on early intervention and inclusion
in mainstream settings where appropriate. Parents, carers and families will have clarity
on the roles of individual system leaders and the standards they must meet. When
delivered successfully, these standards will enable all children and young people to
access an inclusive, high-quality education alongside their peers and will prepare them
for happy, healthy and productive adulthoods.
Developing the National Standards
20. Throughout the consultation, we heard from a number of respondents about the
importance of co-production in developing and delivering the green paper proposals.
Specifically, we heard that the process for developing the National Standards needs to
involve a wide range of key partners, including children, young people and families.
21. We have reflected this feedback in our plans to develop the National Standards with a
wide range of stakeholders, including professional experts across education, health and
care, as well as children, young people and their families. We will involve these partners
at the earliest opportunity, with a focus on understanding the views of children, young
people and their families. Working with leaders and professionals across different areas
and sectors will ensure the standards reflect evidence of the best practice already in the
system, the unique needs of early years and further education settings as well as the
28
impact of these reforms. The case study below from Lincolnshire is a valuable example
of how co-production can be built in throughout policy development.
Case Study - Lincolnshire Young Voices
Lincolnshire Young Voices (LYV) is a participation group set up to improve service delivery
for young people with SEND. The group's members are young people with SEND in the
area, who bring their voices and experiences to the forefront of their work. The group
encourages and welcomes new members and is funded and supported by Lincolnshire
County Council and Lincolnshire Integrated Care Board.
LYV works strategically with partners across Lincolnshire to:
research and improve issues young people with SEND face in the community.
raise awareness of members' SEND experiences and of LYV in organisations, with
professionals, councillors and the wider public.
inspire young people with SEND to have a voice.
In 2022 LYV developed an online learning resource called 'A Rough Guide to not Putting
Your Foot in it', for professionals such as GPs to improve their confidence when
communicating with people with SEND. The group led the project, including drafting the
course content and recording the video scripts. Their presentation on the resource has
been delivered nationally and LYV have been asked to support other areas around the
country in developing similar resources and participation groups.
LYV won the NASEN (National Association for Special Educational Needs) Award for co-
production in 2022.
22. During spring 2023, we will set up a steering group of cross-sector representatives to
oversee the development of standards. We will regularly test our work with a wide
range of stakeholders across education, health and social care, including children,
young people and their families. We will embed development of standards in the work
of the Change Programme to ensure the standards can be tested, iterated and set up
for success. We will also build on the findings from the Alternative Provision Specialist
Taskforce (APST) pilot (see chapter 4) to reflect existing best practice. Sign-off from
the Department for Education will play an important role in ensuring the standards are
evidence-based, deliverable and support financial sustainability.
23. We know that it will take time to develop a complete set of standards and to set the
system up to implement these successfully. To allow time for genuine co-production
and testing, we will develop the standards in stages:
During spring 2023, we will establish the National Standards Steering Group and
identify experts to begin developing the content of the standards.
By the end of 2023, we will have some elements of the National Standards ready
for testing by the Regional Expert Partnerships.
29
By the end of 2025, we will publish a significant proportion of the National
Standards, with a focus on those that are most deliverable in the current system.
At the earliest opportunity, we will underpin the National Standards with
legislation and, ahead of legislating, we will publish the National Standards in full
for consultation.
24. Throughout this process, we will use the best available evidence on what works to
support a range of needs, from universal support, through SEN Support, to the more
specialist support provided via EHCPs. This will build on existing successful
programmes, such as the £17 million Nuffield Early Language Intervention that targets
children needing extra support with their speech and language development and is
proven to help them make around three months of additional progress. We will identify
any gaps in evidence and explore opportunities to build a stronger evidence base in the
long-term, including commissioning new research as necessary.
25. Publishing the National Standards will signal the government's expectations of what
high-quality and evidence-based support should be available across universal, targeted
and specialist support. In turn, this should shape commissioning behaviour at a local
area and whole school or college level by influencing the content of local inclusion
plans, the commissioning practices of system leaders and the support that individual
children and young people receive.
26. We received consultation feedback on the importance of the National Standards for
health and care as well as education. The Department for Education, the Department
of Health and Social Care and NHS England have agreed to engage health and social
care bodies at set points and on specific standards. They will be closely involved in the
development of the National Standards, which will ensure strategic oversight and input
from frontline health professionals. We will develop National Standards that recognise
the role of health and social care and the interdependencies, while operating within the
existing statutory framework for health and adult social care.
27. In parallel to these reforms to the SEND and alternative provision system, the government
is also delivering an ambitious plan for reform of children's social care. Alignment between
the two programmes will ensure that social care needs are more effectively addressed.
Government is taking forward the recommendation of the Independent Review of
Children's Social Care to introduce a Children's Social Care National Framework that sets
the direction for practice and is supported by practice guides that bring together evidence-
based advice and information. The Children's Social Care National Framework was
published on 2 February 2023, alongside the government's formal response to the
Independent Review of Children's Social Care, which is now open to consultation.
30
Delivering National Standards
28. We heard that delivering the National Standards in practice is critical if we are to
genuinely improve experiences and outcomes for children, young people and their
families and we agree that accountability is essential for successful implementation.
Others told us that the standards need to strike a balance between supporting and
challenging the system if they are to deliver real culture change. Local government
organisations and unions stressed the need for funding to incentivise delivery against
the standards. They also highlighted that improving skills and capacity across the
workforce is vital to delivering the right provision for children and young people.
29. We recognise that publishing National Standards will not deliver change on their own.
Standards will only be translated into reality through efficient funding, effective
accountability and an appropriately resourced and skilled workforce. The remainder of
this Plan sets out the underpinning drivers that are necessary for implementing
National Standards in practice. We know that such large-scale change across
education, health and care will take time as we test and refine key proposals, but we
remain committed to achieving this shared ambition in the months and years to come.
Local SEND and alternative provision partnerships and
local inclusion plans
30. The SEND and Alternative Provision Green Paper consulted on the proposal to establish
statutory local SEND and alternative provision partnerships. These partnerships would
bring together partners across education, health (including mental health) and care and
enable local authorities to work collaboratively with each other, with parents and other
extended partners such as youth justice, to meet their statutory responsibilities for
children and young people with SEND and those who need alternative provision. We set
out that partnerships will be responsible for undertaking a joint needs assessment and
producing a strategic local inclusion plan (LIP) for local delivery including setting out the
provision and services that should be commissioned in line with the National Standards.
The LIP will inform the existing statutory local offer of SEND services and provision, as
well as clarifying the graduated SEN Support offer, so parents and practitioners can
clearly see what they can expect in their area. In due course, this will also form the basis
for providing parents and carers with a tailored list of settings.
31. Throughout the consultation we heard broad support for these proposals. Stakeholders
agree that bringing key partners together at the right level to make strategic decisions
is essential. Whilst there are excellent examples of effective partnership working in
some areas currently, it is not happening consistently across the system. As a result,
decisions are not always ultimately made in the best interests of children and
young people.
31
32. We also heard that the views of parents, carers, children and young people are vital in
successful partnerships. Consultation respondents welcomed local SEND and
alternative provision partnerships as a way of facilitating effective representation of
children, young people and their families, ensuring co-production is at the centre of
decision-making, improving transparency and communications with parents. We also
heard the importance of structures to facilitate regional collaboration, particularly for
post-16 and the commissioning of provision for children and young people with the
most complex needs where providers regularly face challenges working across a
number of local authorities. We will seek to address this in the guidance for
partnerships and plans.
33. Many consultation responses highlighted how the need for specialist provision exceeds
the available places because the system is not managed well enough. Children and
young people whose needs could be met in a well-supported mainstream setting are
instead in special schools or alternative provision, while those who need a specialist
placement may not be offered one, or able to find one close to home. Children and
young people with particularly complex SEN and disabilities often have to be placed a
considerable distance from their families and community. In its recent report, the
National Safeguarding Panel found that the 108 children placed at three children's
residential care settings formerly run by the Hesley Group were placed an average of 95
miles from home⁹. A strong LIP, grounded in an evidence-based understanding of the
services and placements which children and young people will need in the future, will
allow local authorities, Integrated Care Systems, schools and colleges to change what
they offer so that it meets evolving needs. We want to amplify best practice and support
areas to maximise effective partnership working. To achieve this, we are planning to
approach delivery in three phases across financial years 2023 - 2025 and beyond.
Phase one
Phase two
Phase three
(2023)
(2024)
(2025 onwards)
The SEND and Alternative
The SEND and
Seek to introduce
Provision Change
Alternative Provision
primary legislation at
Programme's Regional
Change Programme's
the next available
Expert Partners will support
Regional Taskforce
opportunity to put
areas to design and test their
Teams will target
partnerships on a
partnerships and LIPs,
support to areas most
statutory footing and
beginning in spring 2023.
in need/least mature to
mandate collaborative
Non-statutory guidance will
develop their
working.
be issued in autumn 2023,
partnership structures
Support the future
outlining the full detail of the
and develop LIPs.
introduction of tailored
expectations for local SEND
lists of settings.
9
Safeguarding children with disabilities and complex health needs in residential settings, Child Safeguarding Practice
Review Panel, 2022
32
and alternative provision
The Department for
Continue to work
partnerships including clear
Education's Regions
with Ofsted to make
roles and responsibilities for
Group will work with
sure framework
the partnership collectively
local SEND and
reflects updated
and the partners individually.
alternative provision
arrangements.
Guidance will set out the
partnerships to
requirements for LIPs
develop and agree
including the requirements for
LIPs by end of 2024.
co-production with children
and their families.
This will be underpinned by a
maturity matrix self-
assessment tool to support
local areas to evolve
partnerships and move
towards new model of plans.
Capital investment in new specialist placements and
alternative provision
34. Many respondents reported that the need for specialist provision exceeds the available
places. We have committed to invest £2.6 billion over the next three years to deliver
new places and improve existing provision for children and young people with SEND
aged between 0 and 25, or who require alternative provision.
35. On 29 March 2022, we announced High Needs Provision Capital Allocations
amounting to over £1.4 billion of new investment. This funding will support local
authorities to deliver new places, across the 0-25 system, for academic years 2023/24
and 2024/25 and improve existing provision for children and young people with SEND
or who need alternative provision.
36. On 10 June 2022, we published our 'how to apply' guidance for the latest special and
alternative provision free school application waves. We are approving a tranche of
applications from local authorities to open new special free schools in their area. We
will shortly launch competitions to seek high-quality proposer groups to run these
schools. This is in addition to 92 open special free schools and a further 49 which are
in the delivery pipeline. Applications for partnerships to open new alternative provision
free schools closed on the 17 February 2023. We are currently in the process of
assessing those applications and we expect to announce the outcome of both
application waves in autumn 2023.
37. Starting from summer 2023, we plan to collect data from local authorities on the
capacity of special schools and SEN units/resourced provision in mainstream schools,
as well as forecasts of the numbers of specialist placements local authorities expect to
33
make in SEN units/resourced provision, special schools (of all types) and alternative
provision. We expect this to be an annual data collection, forming part of the existing
School Capacity Survey (SCAP) which will support local authorities in managing their
specialist provision. We will explore options for improving and broadening the data we
collect in future years. We are working closely with local authorities and other sector
stakeholders to ensure the data we collect best supports the needs of users across the
0-25 system. Guidance on completing the SCAP survey, including tools to support local
authorities in assessing the capacity of special schools, will be published in the spring.
Case Study - Unity Schools Partnership
Unity Schools Partnership is a multi-academy trust (MAT) consisting of primary, middle,
secondary and special schools in Suffolk, on the Essex and Cambridgeshire borders and
in East London. The trust has an inclusive ethos centred around providing education that
caters for all children in the community. There are three tiers of SEND support within the
trust: special schools, high-quality inclusive teaching in mainstream schools and specialist
units at mainstream schools.
In all of its schools, high-quality teaching for children with SEND is the first response to
meeting their needs and the SENCo ensures teaching staff have guidance and support.
Unity Schools Partnership schools have high aspirations of and expectations for all
learners, aiming to enable all pupils to take part in lessons effectively and participate fully
in school life.
Looking at its more specialist provision, specialist units were opened in five schools in the
trust in September 2020 as part of a local authority capital programme in Suffolk to create
new specialist education places. Each unit caters for different age ranges from key stage 1
to 4 and different types of need.
The specialist units allow children and young people to be part of a dedicated class which
supports their individual needs, while also having access to the mainstream school
community, for example:
The Arch at Castle Manor Academy
The Arch at Castle Manor Academy supports 22 pupils in key stages 3 and 4 with
cognition and learning needs. Pupils follow a personalised curriculum and integrate within
the mainstream setting at a level that is appropriate to their needs, with the support of
teaching assistants. Where possible, pupils 'shadow' the mainstream expectations, values
and curriculum themes so they can participate with the wider school when they are ready.
Pupils in The Arch take part in a wide range of curriculum and extra-curricular activities.
They enjoy many activities including collecting badges for their work in living the school
values, school trips with their peers and all play a musical instrument. Staff have noted that
strong friendships have been made both within and outside of The Arch.
34
Specialist post-16 provision
38. Several respondents highlighted a lack of strategic planning for specialist post-16
provision both locally and regionally, which they felt led to missed opportunities to
make the most of such provision, particularly for young people with complex needs. We
received strong calls from specialist post-16 institutions and their representatives that
the sector is not given the right recognition. Too often this provision is considered as
sitting outside, rather than an integral part of the further education sector.
39. We propose to work with the sector to review the way the Department for Education
defines and manages specialist further education and to consider what changes could
be made to reinforce that integrated position within the wider further education sector.
Wraparound support for families
40. There will be improved access to wraparound services for families and more timely
access to specialist support from health and social care partners where a child or
young person requires this. The Children's Social Care Implementation Strategy
committed to including a stronger focus on support for children with a disability as part
of proposed updates to Working Together to Safeguard Children. Through the rollout of
family hubs, we are seeking to improve access to a range of services and have set
specific requirements for local authorities receiving family hubs funding around helping
families who have children with SEND.
Short Breaks Innovation Fund
41. Short breaks provide children, young people and their families with opportunities to
enjoy extra-curricular activities, respite and space to develop skills beyond their
everyday school and home contexts. They aim to strengthen student resilience and
family capacity, therefore de-escalating the interventions that might be required for
pupils at risk of moving from mainstream to specialist settings, or into care. The green
paper committed £30 million to the Short Breaks Innovation Fund to develop national
policy for short breaks by funding innovative, integrated and inclusive approaches to
short breaks to address the concern that the policy is under-developed and
inconsistently applied.
42. In the first year of the programme (financial year 22-23), we are funding 7 local
authority projects to deliver innovative approaches to short breaks in addition to their
normal provision, across the 0-25 age range. For year two of the programme, we have
taken on board feedback that bids should be co-produced with families and set a
requirement that all bids must be supported by the local parent carer forum. £10 million
is available for grants of up to £1 million to 10-15 local authorities for year two and
successful bidders will be announced shortly.
35
43. Three years of developing innovative approaches will give us a stronger evidence base
on what works well. As part of our reforms to children's social care, we will ensure that
we draw on the innovative and inclusive approaches emerging from the Short Breaks
Innovation Fund to influence our own approach to structural reform and service design.
Case Study - Short Breaks Innovation Fund in Sunderland
Sunderland City Council is one of the local authorities taking part in the Short Breaks
Innovation Fund programme. One of its offers is Breathing Space, a whole-family model of
short breaks both after school and during school holidays. It is designed to offer joined-up
support and create positive opportunities for families with children who have social,
emotional or mental health needs or autism and who are at risk of suspension or
permanent exclusion from school. The aim is to improve behaviour over the longer term to
improve and/or maintain children's attendance at school.
Breathing Space has different hubs, including:
a family hub centre which delivers specialist emotional support sessions for children.
a group for non-verbal children with autism, providing sensory and crafts sessions.
an alternative provision school providing after-school extra-curricular activities, such as
cooking and trips to the theatre.
Overall, the Breathing Space short breaks provision has helped with:
an improvement in pupils' attendance.
an improvement in pupils' behaviour in school, linked to improved attitudes to learning.
a decrease in suspensions.
Supporting Families
44. As part of the Supporting Families programme, a £450,000 pilot project will be
established to test approaches to establishing more robust links between SEND and the
early help system in each area. Local authorities will be invited to bid for funding to test
models of strengthening the join-up between systems locally. This could include, for
example, ensuring that any family whose child is undergoing an EHC assessment is
offered an early help conversation so that the needs of all members of the family can be
understood and support provided. Some areas may also develop projects to increase
the involvement of school staff, who already know and understand children with SEND in
their settings, to lead on or contribute to early help assessments, ensuring that families
with children with SEND are identified and offered support. This increased focus on
non-stigmatising access to help is also central to our Family Help reform proposals,
which will improve the experience and outcomes for disabled children and their families.
45. We have committed through the Independent Review of Children's Social Care to track
the experiences of children with a disability through the care system and will incorporate
a strong focus on specific support for children with a disability and their families in our
pathfinder testing. In response to the recommendations in the Independent Review of
36
Children's Social Care, we will establish pathfinders in up to 12 local areas, to test
elements of the Family Help reforms. The Support and Protection pathfinders will help us
effectively deliver reforms around eligibility for Family Help, access to services via the
'front door' so that it is more needs-based and welcoming, the Family Help workforce
working with families in need (under section 17 of the Children Act 1989) and the
tailoring of support to meet specific needs, including SEND. An important area for us to
test will be how a multidisciplinary team of Family Help workers hold section 17 cases in
a way that reduces handovers that are unhelpful for families and avoids the stigma
which some families with a child with SEND currently experience.
46. In line with the recommendation made by the Independent Review of Children's Social
Care, we have asked the Law Commission to review existing social care legislation
relating to disabled children so we can improve clarity for families about the support
they are legally entitled to, ensuring that families know how to access support and local
authorities know what they are expected to provide.
47. We will convene a joint children's social care/SEND roundtable discussion on disability
this year, to work with sector experts to make these commitments a reality.
48. The Department for Work and Pensions launched the Reducing Parental Conflict
(RPC) programme in 2018 to encourage local authorities across England to embed
parental conflict support in their local service provision for families. Up to £19 million is
available to local authorities to progress this work during this Spending Review. This is
particularly important for parents of children with SEND, as this can be a key driver of
conflict between parents.
A reformed, nationally consistent EHCP process
49. The green paper set out a vision for EHCPs where there was greater consistency
between local authorities' processes, to ensure that those who need more specialist
support can get it faster and in a more joined-up way. The green paper restated our
commitment to the principle of co-production: that children, young people and their
families and services work together as equal partners to support children and young
people to achieve their goals. To improve the experience and quality of these plans, we
proposed to:
standardise the templates and processes around EHCPs to improve consistency
and best practice, improving experiences for families and children and young
people seeking plans.
digitise EHCPs, to reduce the burden of administrative process in the system,
improve the experience and satisfaction of parents, carers and professionals and
improve our ability to monitor the health of the SEND system.
introduce the use of local multi-agency panels to improve parental confidence in
the Education, Health and Care (EHC) needs assessment process.
37
50. These measures were broadly popular across all respondent groups who reported that
the EHCP process would benefit from being standardised, simplified, accessible and
available digitally. However, while there is agreement that these are the right measures
to pursue, it is also clear that local authorities' arrangements have evolved over time to
reflect their different circumstances and the needs of their local communities.
Therefore, any changes to EHCP processes will need to be worked through carefully to
deliver the improvements we all want to see.
51. We said in the green paper that we would consult separately on changing the timescale
for the issuing of draft EHCPs following annual reviews. We have considered the
responses to the subsequent consultation alongside those to the green paper, given
that both consultations relate to reform of the EHCP system. We will shortly be
publishing the government response.
Standardisation of templates
52. Although many agreed that standardising EHCP templates is the right thing to do, there
was also agreement that plans for this diverse group of children and young people
were often complex for good reason, and that standardised paperwork should not
result in standardised provision. Most of those who responded to this proposal felt that
section F (special educational provision) particularly needed reform. Some respondents
felt plans were not revised often enough to reflect the needs of the child or young
person as they progressed. Children and young people wanted their plans to be co-
produced with them and reflect their goals, ambitions and the full breadth of their lives
- their friends and interests as well as their education and employment. They wanted
their plans to enable others to understand their strengths as well as the things they
found difficult.
53. We will now start work on a national EHCP template, supported by guidance, in
partnership with relevant bodies, including parents, children and young people. We will
encourage all local authorities to adopt the template and consider the case for
mandating its use through legislation.
Digitised EHCPs and digital requirements for EHCPs
54. We think the case is clear for all SEND services to move to digital systems for EHCPs.
Digital systems can deliver better experiences for both families and professionals and
enable them to continuously improve their services - focusing staff time on working
with families rather than managing bureaucracy. These improvements could also help
realise the benefits of anonymous data collection, taking account of data protection
laws considerations and information sharing protocols, to track indicators such as
progress made towards outcomes, trends in the prevalence of need and the provision
that is made available. This timely picture of the health of the SEND system could help
build the evidence base for National Standards and be a feature of the national and
local inclusion dashboard.
38
55. We are pleased that so many local authorities have already implemented digital EHCP
systems and would like all local authorities to move quickly to digitise to gain the
benefits outlined.
56. This is an evolving market. We recognise that local authorities are at very different
stages of their digital journey and that this Improvement Plan contains significant, long-
term reforms to the SEND system which digital EHCP systems will need to
accommodate. We have spoken to local authority SEND teams and recognise the need
for local collaboration and leadership to drive these improvements forward. Any digital
EHCP system should also be implemented to recognise and comply with additional
data collection asks, such as the SEN2 annual survey.
57. Therefore, in parallel to local digitisation, the Department for Education will work to
develop digital requirements for local authorities to adapt to over time. We will continue
to work with local authorities and suppliers to best support this shift towards digitisation
and move towards consistent standards of digital EHCP systems.
58. We will work to develop and deliver digital requirements for EHCP processes by:
Phase one
Phase two
Phase three
(2023)
(2024)
(2025)
Working with local
Designing digital
Dependent on digital
authorities, suppliers and
solutions and testing
solutions tested and
families to further test
drafts with local
agreed upon, begin
how digital solutions
authorities and suppliers.
rollout of requirements
might best improve their
across local authorities.
experiences of the
EHC process.
Multi-agency panels
59. Respondents agreed that having a wider group of relevant professionals and partners
to advise the local authority at key decision points through the EHC process - at the
application, planning and review stages - could add value. However, they felt that
government needed to be precise about the scope, status and membership of these
panels for them to be effective.
60. We know that many local authorities have established multi-agency panels who meet
regularly. We recognise that there are other panels (such as multi-agency safeguarding
hubs, Local Inclusion Group members or advisory panels of expert practitioners) that
already provide support and challenge and we do not want to increase bureaucracy in
the system. However, the main source of independent scrutiny of local authority
decisions specifically related to the statutory SEND system is currently the First-tier
Tribunal. We think enabling a more holistic conversation between local partners about
39
a child or young person's needs and plan, where those partners can support and
challenge each other, would promote good local authority decision-making and
facilitate timely help and access to services for children and young people with SEND.
61. We believe there is a potential role for panels to bring together partners who can
provide services more quickly and easily, drawing on the expected provision outlined in
the National Standards for educational support, and linking up with health-
commissioned services and family help, including short breaks. The panels could help
to ensure families are offered services, going beyond signposting and helping families
to navigate the system across education, health (including mental health) and care.
Offering the right services at this early stage will help to reduce escalation of need and
reassure parents that their child is being effectively supported to thrive through
ordinarily available services, providing consistency around when an EHC assessment
can add most value. Where a child does require more intensive and coordinated
support, the panel can support the local authority in the decision to carry out an EHC
assessment, whilst also looking to offer support promptly.
62. We will work with a small number of local authorities to develop and test a standard for
multi-agency advisory panels, to assess the most effective size, membership and remit
of a group, and whether the standard EHCP form is effective. We will take this forward
alongside the Children's Social Care Implementation Strategy's commitment to
strengthen the role of education settings as part of proposed updates to the statutory
guidance on Working Together to Safeguard Children.
Tailored Lists
63. As this Plan makes clear, we must ensure that children and young people receive the
support that is right for them and that decisions about placements are backed by
evidence of what will set them up for success.
64. We outline in this chapter how new local inclusion plans overseen by the new local
SEND and alternative provision partnerships will set out how the needs of children and
young people in the area will be met in line with the new National Standards. We will
ensure this informs the existing statutory local offer of SEND services and provision, as
well as clarifying the graduated SEN Support offer, so parents can clearly see what
they can expect in their area.
65. In response to the green paper many families, local authorities and those working in
education agreed that greater clarity is needed around what support and placements
are available so that children and young people get the right support in the right setting.
We have heard agreement that a tailored list of settings would provide parents and
carers with clearer information, supporting them to express an informed preference for
a placement.
40
66. We want to improve families' experiences, by helping them to understand and assess
the available options. A tailored list would allow local authorities to give clear choices to
families and better meet the needs of children and young people, while supporting them
to manage placements in a way that ensures financial sustainability for the future. To
ensure we can deliver these goals, we will first test this proposal through the Change
Programme in a limited number of areas to gain feedback on the best way to support
families. In the areas we test this proposal, there will be no change to the existing
statutory framework and parents and young people's existing rights will be unaffected.
67. We have also heard some of the significant concerns, particularly from groups
representing parents, carers and children and young people, about the introduction of
the tailored list. Many were concerned that this would reduce choice, and that meeting
the needs of the child or young person would not be the central consideration in
drawing up the list. Others wanted to see further detail on this proposal.
68. We will continue to listen to children, young people, their families and SEND sector
professionals as we develop and test delivery options for amending the process for
naming a place within an EHCP by providing parents and carers with a tailored list of
settings. These will include mainstream, specialist and independent placements where
appropriate, informed by local inclusion plans that will be produced through
engagement with children, young people and their families. We are committed to
ensuring parents, children and young people continue to be involved in the decision-
making process and will have the right to request a mainstream setting for their child,
even when they are eligible for a specialist setting.
69. Development of the tailored list will be sequenced alongside wider system reforms,
particularly the introduction of National Standards, improved accountability and better
local planning. Tailored lists will only be introduced in an area once the local inclusion
plan has been quality assured and signed off by the Department for Education's
Regions Group as being in accordance with the National Standards.
Testing and delivering change through a £70 million
Change Programme
70. We have heard frequently that the primary reason why the high aspirations of the 2014
reforms have not yet been achieved is because insufficient attention was paid to
implementation. That is why we committed in the green paper to support delivery of
these reforms through a £70 million SEND and alternative provision Change
Programme. This will test and refine key reform proposals and support local SEND and
alternative provision systems across the country to manage local improvement.
41
71. The emphasis we have placed on delivery and implementation for this reform programme
has been welcomed. We have heard that lessons must be learned from the past to
prevent unintended consequences, such as a drift away from inclusion in mainstream
education and over-emphasis on securing an EHCP in order to access support in the
future. Some consultation feedback focused on the need to develop a programme that
delivers effective support for children, young people and families whilst enabling
professionals within the system to deliver their duties and implement significant reforms.
72. Many respondents wanted to see further information about the proposed pace and
timing of reforms. Some highlighted the need for fast and effective delivery in the short
term, with clear direction for longer term changes.
73. We are clear that we need to support local SEND systems across the country to
manage current pressures and local improvements. We need to do this whilst also
testing and refining some of the more complex key areas of reform so we can be
confident that they will deliver on our ambitions, without introducing unintended
consequences. This will enable our understanding of the overall impact of reforms on
the system. The £70 million Change Programme will serve as the delivery vehicle for
this work by creating up to 9 Regional Expert Partnerships. These Partnerships will
consist of a cluster of 3-4 local authorities in each region, including at least one lead
local authority. These will help test and refine the key reforms over the next two years,
with oversight from the National SEND and Alternative Provision Implementation
Board. The programme will:
test, deliver and iterate the key reforms to achieve our ambitions for children and
young people with SEND or who are supported by alternative provision. This will
ensure we allow services to deliver to a high standard. It will also ensure that we
deliver the systemic improvements needed to improve outcomes and can intervene
to secure improvement where needed. Testing will provide an early indication of
progress against our reform mission. It will build the required evidence base to
determine the advantages, and understand the potential disadvantages, of the
reforms in the SEND and alternative provision system.
spread this learning and provide bespoke targeted support in areas that are
struggling the most, by creating and deploying an expert 'taskforce' to support
change in each region. The taskforces will draw on expertise from the Regional
Expert Partnerships and the Delivery Partner's SEND, alternative provision and
system transformation expertise. The taskforces will build capacity and proficiency
and implement best practice in these areas, complementing any improvement
support already being received. They will do this by supporting local areas to
harness, innovate, scale and support the spread of effective practice on the ground.
This will drive high standards and excellence in the basics, help to stabilise the
system and prepare the sector for delivery of the SEND and alternative provision
reforms to improve outcomes for children and young people with SEND or who are
in alternative provision.
42
74. The proposed model builds on consultation feedback that we need to focus on
improving mainstream settings to ensure more timely support is available, whilst
sharing effective practice on the ground. The model creates a consortium of expertise
in each Region, with a clear rationale for identifying those providing support, those
being supported and the focus of that support. Delivery in local areas will be overseen
by local strategic partnerships to give fast and effective support.
75. Data on outcomes and experiences of the SEND system highlights some disparities in
relation to certain characteristics such as place, gender and race. The government has
committed to addressing these disparities more broadly, including through the Inclusive
Britain report, published in March 2022. In testing and delivering proposals for the
SEND and alternative provision system, we want to ensure that the voices of all
children and young people with SEND or in alternative provision and their families are
effectively heard and no group is disadvantaged in securing timely access to the right
provision - irrespective of place, disadvantage, race or gender. Through the evaluation
of the Regional Expert Partnerships, we will assess the extent to which our reforms are
enabling this ambition and refine our plans accordingly.
43
Chapter 3: Successful transitions and preparation
for adulthood
1. Our vision is of a SEND and alternative provision system which supports children and
young people to successfully move through education and into adulthood, regardless of
whether they have an EHCP, through the wide variety of routes available.
2. Although each child and young person's journey will be different, destination planning
should be built in from the earliest stages and should continue through their education,
centred around the aspirations, interests, and needs of the child or young person.
Provision should support children and young people to develop independence,
contribute to their community, develop positive friendships, be as healthy as possible,
and, for the majority of young people, prepare them for higher education and/or
employment.
3. The Department for Education's skills reforms will provide a ladder of opportunity to
help young people access excellent education and skills training and continue learning
through adulthood, to secure good jobs and progress in their careers.
We will:
publish guidance to support effective transitions between all stages of education,
and into employment and adult services.
conduct a pilot to consider the evidence required to access flexibilities to standard
English and mathematics requirements for apprenticeships.
invest £18 million between 2022 and 2025 to double the capacity of the Supported
Internships Programme.
continue to support the Department for Work and Pensions' Adjustments Passport
pilot to smooth the transition into employment.
improve the Disabled Students' Allowance process, by continuing to work with the
Student Loans Company to reduce the time for support to be agreed.
Supporting effective transitions
4. Successful transitions must be well-planned. Late planning and decision-making for a
child or young person's next stage and poor support around transitions were clear
themes in the consultation feedback, particularly in relation to post-16. Many felt that
support is not in place at the point of transition as information about students' needs is
not shared readily, easily or early enough. For students with an EHCP, local authorities
must specify the post-16 provision and name a setting by 31 March for students leaving
school, but this deadline is regularly missed. For those without an EHCP, there is no
consistent approach for sharing this information between schools and post-16 settings.
44
5. To address this, the Department for Education is developing good practice guidance to
support consistent, timely, high-quality transitions for children and young people with
SEND and in alternative provision. This will ultimately look at transitions between all
stages of education from early years and will focus initially on transitions into and out of
post-16 settings. This includes transitions into employment, adult services and for
young people leaving alternative provision at the end of key stage 4, building on
learning from the recent Alternative Provision Transition Fund.
6. We are working with the Department for Work and Pensions and key partners from the
SEND and post-16 sectors, including the Association of Colleges and Natspec, to
develop the project. We are working with young people with different types of need,
including those with and without EHCPs, to co-produce the guidance to ensure it
improves experiences and outcomes. We will also involve parents and carers. This
guidance will feed into the National Standards and practice guides as they are
developed. We will consider how this is reflected when amending the SEND Code of
Practice. As set out in chapter 5, we are strengthening accountabilities across the 0-25
system, to ensure children, young people, and their families receive the support they
need, including at key transition points.
7. We are also conducting research to understand current user journeys of young people
applying and enrolling in post-16 education, to improve the sharing of information.
8. The Department for Education and the Department for Work and Pensions are working
closely together to underpin successful and supported transitions into employment: the
Minister for Children, Families and Wellbeing, the Minister for Disabled People and the
Minister for Social Mobility, Youth and Progression will meet regularly to drive forward
cross-departmental activity to support those transitions.
Case Study - George's* experience in further education at City College Norwich
*The name of the student in this case study has been changed
George joined the agriculture and land-based college at City College Norwich and has
additional needs of autism; social emotional and mental health needs; dyspraxia and
hypermobility.
The college planned George's transition into college well, involving his parents and the
college's specialist EHCP team. Through visits, George was able to orientate his way
around the site and reduce his anxiety. George flourished which soon meant that the
support he needed reduced. By the end of the year, George had grown in confidence and
independence which enabled him to give peer support to other learners.
George said, "I feel I've made some friends on my course. I have friends from high school
who I keep in contact with. I feel I'm on the right course and training to be what I want to
be. I am slowly getting to talk to more of the class. I'm good at practical things and a
decent amount of theory."
45
His parents have noted that George is joining in and speaking more. They feel this is a
combination of realising that he has to ask for help, and that he is enjoying the lessons as
they all relate to what he wants to do in the future.
Transitions to Adult Services
9. We recognise that transitioning between child and adult services, including into adult
social care, can be challenging. The Department for Education is working with the
Department of Health and Social Care and NHS England to identify how we can
improve these transitions, with the aim to include this in the transitions guidance
mentioned above. The work set out in chapter 5 to improve accountability across the 0-
25 system will also support this. We are working together with the Department of
Health and Social Care to update the Statutory guidance for local authorities and NHS
organisations to support implementation of the adult autism strategy, which includes a
chapter on transitions. We will also explore good practice to smooth the transition into
adult services for young people whose needs are very complex and who may never be
able to undertake paid work, to ensure they have options which enable them to flourish
and live life to the full.
Higher Education
10. We expect all professionals working with children and young people with SEND to have
high aspirations for them, and this includes striving for them to access higher education
(HE). We heard through consultation events that a proportion of young people do not
feel effectively supported to transition into HE, with some reporting delays in receiving
support through Disabled Students' Allowance (DSA), and that there are significant
differences in the levels and types of support available at different Higher Education
Providers (HEPs). Some consultation responses suggested extending EHCPs to
support people in HE, to address these issues.
11. In preparation for the 2014 SEND reforms, there was significant discussion with
stakeholders followed by debate in Parliament about whether the statutory SEND
system (including EHCPs) should extend to HE. It was decided that it should not, as the
HE sector already has a number of systems in place to support young people with
disabilities. However, we recognise that more can be done to strengthen these systems.
12. The Department for Education and the Welsh Government are working with the Student
Loans Company to reduce the length of time it takes for a student to progress from
making their DSA application to having their DSA support agreed. We will also seek to
set expectations through our transitions guidance on how students should be supported
to transition into HE, including how they should be supported to apply for DSA.
46
13. The Department for Education agrees with the recommendation from the Disabled
Students' Commission that university staff need guidance on how to support disabled
students. This is so university staff understand the barriers students face and so they
can improve students' experiences in HE. This recommendation is likely to be included
in the 'Commitment' the Disabled Students' Commission is due to launch in March
2023, asking HEPs to commit to a range of recommended good practice in supporting
disabled students.
Qualifications reform
14. The government is committed to supporting students with their future and career
planning by improving the quality of qualifications and streamlining their number. Since
2013, we have reformed the national curriculum, GCSEs and A levels to set world-
class standards across all subjects. These reforms were substantial and have made a
lasting improvement to qualifications, ensuring they reflect the knowledge and skills all
pupils need to progress. Our gold-standard qualifications system gives all young
people, including those with SEND, the opportunity to achieve their full potential and
prepare for a huge range of careers. It does this by offering them a wide choice of
different high-quality, evidence-informed academic and technical pathways.
15. Alongside this, our reforms to post-16 level 2 and below qualifications will help to
deliver an improved landscape for students. This will enable learners to benefit from
high-quality provision that better equips them for progression into work or further study
at a higher level. In the government response to the post-16 level 2 and below
qualifications review consultation, we set out the groups of qualifications that we intend
to fund in the future, grouping the qualifications by level and by purpose, i.e. whether
they support progression to employment or to higher levels of study. We are committed
to having flexibilities in place to ensure students with SEND can access these
qualification groups, and there will be a range of options at all levels which create
pathways through the system. We will also regularly review the mix and balance of
qualifications approved and engage with SEND stakeholders to ensure we are meeting
the needs of all learners.
16. We are also developing a set of National Standards for Personal, Social and
Employability Skills Qualifications. These qualifications provide knowledge and skills to
support the transition into employment and are particularly important for some students
with SEND. We will design these with experts from the education sector and industry,
drawing on their extensive knowledge and expertise to shape standards that flexibly
meet student needs and deliver relevant knowledge, skills and content in accessible
ways.
47
Preparation for employment
17. We know that with the right preparation and support, the overwhelming majority of young
people with SEND are capable of sustained, paid employment. Throughout the
consultation, we heard repeatedly that children, young people and their families want to
be confident that their education is preparing them for work, and that the people working
with them share those high ambitions. They want to know what options and pathways
are available to them, and what support and adjustments can help them succeed.
18. We expect Careers Leaders to work closely with the relevant teachers and
professionals in their school or college, including the SEND lead, to identify the careers
guidance needs of all pupils, in order to help children, young people and their families
understand the full range of relevant education, training and employment opportunities
available and to support them to achieve their ambitions. To support them with this:
The Careers & Enterprise Company (CEC) provides training and support to
design and deliver careers education programmes tailored to the needs of young
people with SEND regardless of their educational setting. CEC also encourages
employers to provide opportunities for young people with SEND to gain experiences
of workplaces, employer encounters and employment.
The Career Development Institute provides professional development for careers
advisers working with young people with SEND.
19. Over 600,000 primary school pupils will benefit from a new £2.6 million careers
programme that will deliver targeted, age-appropriate careers support in over 2,200
primary schools, to encourage children to think about future jobs and raise aspirations.
The programme is a commitment in the Schools White Paper that will be run by CEC
and which aims to challenge stereotypes, including about people with disabilities.
Transitions into employment
20. In addition to providing careers support, we are working with the Department for Work
and Pensions to smooth young people's transition into employment, for example
through the pilot of an Adjustments Passport. The Passport aims to raise awareness of
in-work support and empower young people to have more structured conversations
with employers about their support needs. We have been supporting the Passport
pilots in three HEPs. Evaluation reports show strong agreement from the more than
200 HE students taking part in the pilots that the Passport will help them get
adjustments in the workplace. We are working with Supported Internship and
Apprenticeship providers to trial the Passport with supported interns and apprentices
and will consider whether it could be trialled in different settings.
21. To ensure disabled people can access the support they need in work, the Department
for Work and Pensions provides Access to Work funding. This is a demand-led,
discretionary grant that contributes to the disability-related extra costs of working faced
by disabled people and those with a health condition in the workplace which go beyond
48
standard reasonable adjustments, but it does not replace an employer's duty under the
Equality Act to make reasonable adjustments. The grant can provide personalised
support, including workplace assessments, travel to/in work, support workers, specialist
aids and equipment to enable disabled people to move into or retain employment.
Young people on supported internships can claim Access to Work funding to support
them in their work placement, where needed.
22. We recognise that some young people will need ongoing support to help them secure
and sustain employment in adulthood, and we work closely with the Department for
Work and Pensions to ensure our programmes are complementary. The Department
for Work and Pension's Local Supported Employment (LSE) scheme started in
November 2022 and will run until March 2025, helping people with learning difficulties
and / or autism to find and retain work. The aim of LSE is to develop a sustainable
model for delivering Supported Employment that can help increase the number of
supported jobs delivered by local authorities, providing individuals with significant
barriers to work with intensive one-to-one support. LSE is being delivered in 28 local
authorities across England and Wales and will support around 2,000 people.
23. In 2020/21, the Department for Work and Pensions tested an Autism Accreditation
scheme in 15 of its local offices. This scheme developed a service delivery framework
to improve the services that job centres deliver to autistic people, by building the
knowledge and skills of work coaches and improving processes and systems to better
support autistic jobseekers. Although aimed at jobseekers on the autism spectrum, the
service delivery framework will also have benefits for other customers with additional
needs. The test was a success, and the Department for Work and Pensions are now
exploring how to roll-out Autism Accreditation across the whole Jobcentre network.
24. Through the Disability Confident scheme, the Department for Work and Pensions are
working with employers to provide them with the knowledge, skills, and confidence they
need to attract, recruit, retain and develop disabled people and those with long-term
health conditions in the workplace. The scheme encourages employers to think
differently about disability and to take positive action to address the issues disabled
employees face in the workplace. As of February 2023, there are over 17,700 employers
who are members of the scheme¹⁰ covering over 11 million paid employees¹¹
Supported Internships
25. The green paper committed to invest £18 million over the next three years to build
capacity in the Supported Internships Programme and support more young people with
EHCPs into employment. Since then, we have appointed the Internships Work
consortium as the delivery partner for this investment. They will be working closely with
10 Employers that have signed up to the Disability Confident scheme, Department for Work and Pensions, 2023
11 Disability Confident Jobs Fair Speech, Department for Work and Pensions, 2022
49
local authorities to double the number of supported internships by 2025 and will
engage with all partners in the system to level up the quality of internships across the
country. Over 700 job coaches will be trained by 2025 to ensure interns receive high-
quality support on their work placements.
26. As part of this work, up to £10.8 million in grant funding will be available to all local
authorities over the next three years, alongside support and training. This will enable all
local authorities to access a supported employment forum and strengthen the quality of
their Supported Internship offers to improve the transition into sustained, paid
employment for interns.
Case Study - Katie's* experience on the Supported Internship Programme
*The name of the student in this case study has been changed
Katie, who is 20 years old and autistic, was apprehensive when starting her Supported
Internship as sustaining a job was something 'she didn't imagine she'd ever be able to
accomplish'.
As part of the programme, Katie's employer received close support to understand her
needs and any reasonable adjustments required. Katie's job coach supported her with
reassurance, confidence and navigating work-life and relationships. Regular check-ins
between Katie, her job coach, and her managers ensured they could review, adjust and
work together to help their relationship flourish. The ongoing offer of support during and
beyond the Internship was key to making it a success.
Shortly after starting the role, Katie's confidence grew as she was supported to thrive over
her difficulties with peer relationships, social communication, and anxiety. Katie quickly
became an invaluable team member, leading to her being offered a full-time position as
Helpdesk Administrator. Her manager reported that "being able to teach a young person
our world and seeing it make a positive impact has been the most rewarding part of this
placement."
Reflecting upon her experience, Katie shared: "I wouldn't be in this job without receiving
the support I got, I can see all the hard work paid off. It has opened my eyes to the real
world and has made me more confident to try new things. I feel ready for the future and I'm
happy and proud of myself."
Apprenticeships
27. Consultation feedback highlighted the importance of supporting young people with
SEND as they move into employment like an apprenticeship. We are investing in a
comprehensive package of professional development for the apprenticeship provider
workforce, which we launched in November 2022. The package supports providers to
deliver excellent apprenticeships that meet the needs of all individuals, including
making reasonable adjustments for apprentices with disabilities.
50
28. Alongside this, we have published new guidance to make the claims process for learning
support funding clearer. Providers can help eligible apprentices to access and complete
their learning by claiming additional funding where a reasonable adjustment is provided
and evidenced. We are also conducting a pilot to consider the evidence required to
access flexibilities to standard English and mathematics requirements (currently
apprentices with a learning difficulty or disability may be eligible to achieve their
apprenticeship with a reduced level of English or mathematics if they hold an EHCP).
29. We heard about the importance of raising employer awareness and encouraging
inclusive practices so young people can access opportunities like apprenticeships. We
have been working in partnership with the Disabled Apprentice Network and employers
in the Apprenticeship Diversity Champions Network to share the experience of disabled
apprentices and examples of best practice support through publications and events
during National Apprenticeship Week 2023. We will update our employer roadmap so
employers have the information they need to support their apprentices. Employers
could receive £1,000 towards the costs of workplace support when they take on an
apprentice aged 16-18 or 19-25 with an EHCP, as well as help to cover the extra costs
working individuals may have because of their disability through the Department for
Work and Pensions' Access to Work scheme.
30. Consultation feedback also highlighted that children and young people wanted more
understanding about what apprenticeships entail. The Department for Education's
Apprenticeship Support and Knowledge (ASK) programme continues to inform and
inspire young people about apprenticeships, traineeships and T Levels so that they can
access these important routes. This includes additional support to students with SEN
and working with identified development schools. We will work with the Department for
Work and Pensions to ensure that young people with SEND who are in contact with
their services through Jobcentres are aware of apprenticeships and of the benefits they
would bring to them.
Local Skills Improvement Plans
31. We have published Statutory Guidance for employer-led Local Skills Improvement
Plans (LSIPs). This guidance highlights the important role that national bodies
focussing on disability employment, supported employer providers and local disability
groups can play in helping education providers and employers to support people with
SEND so they can be part of the solution to meeting local skills shortages. This focus
on strategic local skills development and supported employment complements the
support we are providing to local authorities as part of the Internships Work
programme, to strengthen their local supported employment offer.
51
Chapter 4: A skilled workforce and excellent leadership
1. The multitude of professionals who deliver for children and young people with SEND -
in early years, schools, colleges, health and care settings, specialist and alternative
provision, local authorities and beyond - are dedicated, highly skilled and passionate
about meeting their needs. Throughout the consultation process, we heard clearly that
reform is not possible without a strong and capable workforce with robust leadership.
Any reform must build on the extensive expertise held by the sector and focus on
setting consistent standards and incentives to build one united workforce around the
child or young person.
We will:
introduce a new leadership level SENCo (Special Educational Needs Co-ordinator)
NPQ (National Professional Qualification) for schools.
review the Initial Teacher Training and Early Career Frameworks (commencing
early this year).
fund up to 5,000 early years staff to gain an accredited Level 3 early years SENCo
qualification to support the early years sector, with training running until August 2024.
increase the capacity of specialists, including by investing a further £21 million to train
two more cohorts of educational psychologists in the academic years 2024 and 2025;
and, in partnership with NHS England, as part of our £70 million Change Programme,
pioneering innovative practice through running Early Language and Support for Every
Child (ELSEC) pathfinders to improve access to speech and language therapy for
those who need it.
work together to take a joint Department for Education and Department of Health
and Social Care approach to SEND workforce planning, including establishing a
steering group in 2023 to oversee this work, which we aim to complete by 2025.
publish the first three practice guides for frontline professionals, building on existing
best practice, including the Nuffield Early Language Intervention, the work of the
Autism Education Trust, and the government's guidance on promoting children and
young people's mental health and wellbeing.
propose new guidance on delivering a responsive and supportive SEND casework
service to families when consulting on the SEND Code of Practice.
develop a longer-term approach for teaching assistants to ensure their impact is
consistent across the system, starting with a research project to develop our evidence
base on current school approaches, demand and best practice.
strongly encourage the adoption of the DSCO (Designated Social Care Officer)
role in each local area, including by proposing an amendment to the SEND Code of
Practice.
extend funding until March 2025 of the alternative provision specialist taskforce
(APST) pilot programme, which is testing co-location of a diverse specialist workforce
in pilot alternative provision schools.
52
2. Equipping the sector to deliver reform for children and young people is a long-term
challenge - and we know that the impact of the cost of living, compounded by the
impact of the pandemic, will make this even more complex. Our programmes and
policies will build confidence and expertise at every level of the workforce, from
teachers and classroom staff through to specialists, and to leaders who set the overall
direction and culture of their settings. We want ordinarily available provision and high-
quality teaching to meet children and young people's needs wherever possible, and
specialist support to complement the skills and expertise of the wider workforce.
3. A key aspect of this will be our SEND and alternative provision practice guides, which
will equip frontline professionals with the skills and expertise to make best use of
provision and to identify needs early, accurately, and consistently. By the end of 2025,
we will publish the first three practice guides focused on advice for mainstream
settings. We will build on existing best practice, such as the Nuffield Early Language
Intervention, the work of the Autism Education Trust, and the government's guidance
on promoting children and young people's mental health and wellbeing. We will identify
any gaps in best practice and help build a stronger evidence base in the long-term.
4. We also know that local authority SEND casework teams play a vital role in supporting
families to navigate the system and ensuring they have good experiences. Timely and
accurate communications are important factors in maintaining parental confidence.
Many of the proposals in this Improvement Plan, such as producing good EHCPs
through a template and a digitised system, ensuring redress systems are effective and
using multi-agency panels well, depend on high-quality delivery by casework teams.
We will further consider the skills and training that these teams receive, and when we
consult on amending the SEND Code of Practice, we will propose new guidance on
delivering a responsive and supportive SEND casework service to families.
Case Study - Telford and Wrekin's SEND casework team
In Telford and Wrekin there has been significant investment in how to approach SEND
casework, with a focus on securing positive relationships with parents and carers and
keeping open communication.
The local authority has found that a key part of this is to "do the basics brilliantly". A swift
response to queries is their priority and as far as possible, they call rather than email.
The team has developed several communication tools with support from its parent carer
forum (PODS) and SEND Information, Advice and Support Services (SENDIASS).
They report that the guide they have produced for parents and carers explaining the
EHC assessment 20-week timeline has been welcomed as it clearly sets out to the family
who their allocated officer is, how to contact them and what to expect during the 20-week
pathway.
They also run Moving Forward Meetings as part of the EHC assessment process. Where a
difficult decision has been taken, the moving forward meeting, which is always conducted
53
face to face at the child's educational setting, allows the officer to talk through the decision
with the parents/carers and agree a forward plan. The local authority shares that this
informal dispute resolution has been incredibly productive, enabled good quality
discussions to take place and supports endeavours to minimise a fall into formal mediation
processes and ultimately Tribunals.
Every year the local authority reflects and refreshes its approach. Recently officers from
the SEND team have led parent drop-ins, which include issues such as early intervention,
alternative funding and support mechanisms. They have also delivered workshops
focusing on parental participation at annual reviews and report that their family newsletters
are very well received.
5. Finally, we are clear that the workforce will be crucial to every aspect of system
improvement. Whilst this chapter sets out our vision for the professionals working with
children and young people, we will consider the workforce throughout all our reform
plans, and understand how we can build the right expertise, capacity and culture to put
these into practice.
Improving mainstream provision through high-quality teaching
and SEND training
Supporting and upskilling the teaching workforce, so that all pupils and students
have access to high-quality teaching, and every teacher is able to adapt their
practice to meet the needs of their classroom
6. Teacher quality is one of the most important in-school determinants of pupil outcomes,
reducing the risk that children fall behind due to missed opportunities or lack of
appropriate support. High-quality, evidence-based teaching is critical in ensuring that
the special educational needs of pupils are not mis-identified when their difficulties may
be due to poor classroom provision, as well as ensuring that the needs of those with
SEN are met effectively.
7. The Schools White Paper set out an ambitious target of 90% of primary school children
achieving the expected standard in reading, writing and mathematics. We know we
cannot reach this without the right support for children with SEND. The needs of most
children can be met through high-quality teaching, and the green paper outlined how
adaptive teaching for children and young people with SEND already underpins the
frameworks for initial teacher training and early career teachers.
8. We heard, however, that we need to go further if we are going to achieve the aim of
improving mainstream provision so that it is more inclusive of children and young
people with SEND. Respondents consistently highlighted the need for ongoing teacher
training - and when children and young people who are in alternative provision were
asked what would have helped them stay in their mainstream school, the most
common answer was teacher training in SEND.
54
9. We will explore opportunities to build teacher expertise through a review of the Initial
Teacher Training (ITT) Core Content Framework and Early Career Framework. Due to
begin early this year, the review will identify how the frameworks can equip new
teachers to be more confident in meeting the needs of children and young people
with SEND.
10. We are also working with the sector to develop guidance on special schools'
involvement in ITT. This will include the appropriate use of special schools for ITT
placements and help ensure that providers have confidence to involve special schools
and alternative provision in their partnerships. This will enable trainees to benefit from
valuable placement experience and enable expertise from special schools and
alternative provision to be incorporated into their ITT.
11. We are also providing free SEND-specific professional development, online training,
live webinars and peer mentoring opportunities to school and college staff at any stage
in their career through the Universal Services programme. The programme, which
began in 2022, is backed by almost £12 million and aims to reach at least 70% of
schools and FE colleges each year until 2025. Delivery is led by NASEN, in partnership
with Education Training Foundation and Autism Education Trust.
12. Since September 2022, the programme has reached out to over 17,000 schools and
engaged 99.5% of FE colleges. Almost 3,000 professionals have accessed free online
training and attended live webinars with sector specialists, and 60,000 professionals
have undertaken autism awareness training through a 'train the trainer' model.
Individualised support is also available, with over 80 schools and 135 colleges starting
peer reviews to identify ways to improve their SEND provision¹².
13. We are also expanding training to increase school staff confidence in using assistive
technology (AT). Following the promising results of our initial pilot, we are extending
assistive technology training to a further 150 maintained schools. The extension,
known as the 'AT Test and Learn' programme, will teach mainstream school staff how
to use AT effectively, with a focus on the technology schools already have available or
can easily obtain, such as text-to-speech tools. It will build on last year's pilot by
training more schools over a longer period and with more impact data to gain a fuller
picture of how AT training can support wider SEND continuing professional
development. The AT Test and Learn course is free to attend, and the next cohort will
run from March to July 2023.
14. Finally, we recognise the recruitment and retention challenges many settings are
facing, and we know that more needs to be done to ensure teaching remains an
attractive, high-status profession. Continuing to attract, retain and develop the highly
skilled teachers we need is one of our top priorities, as set out in our Teacher
Recruitment and Retention Strategy. That is why we are delivering 500,000 training
12 Nasen internal report
55
and development opportunities by the end of 2024, alongside a range of resources to
help schools address teacher workload issues, prioritise staff wellbeing and introduce
flexible working practices.
Supporting and upskilling teaching assistants, so they are deployed effectively to
support children and young people with SEND
15. Support staff play a key role in supporting children and young people with SEND.
Some respondents to the consultation wanted to see more action to acknowledge their
critical role. Evidence suggests that effectively deployed and well-trained teaching
assistants (TAs) can achieve up to four months' progress in pupil attainment.
16. The green paper committed to setting out clear guidance on the effective use and
deployment of TAs to support children and young people with SEND. We will do this
through the new SEND and alternative provision practice guides, enabling TAs and
learning support assistants to make best use of the available provision set out in the
National Standards and setting expectations for good practice in meeting the needs of
individual children and young people.
17. We will also develop a longer-term approach for TAs to ensure their impact is consistent
across the system and the different responsibilities they take on. We want TAs to be
well-trained and to be able to develop specific expertise, for example in speech and
language interventions. As the first step, we will commission a research project to
develop our evidence base on current school approaches, demand and best practice.
Targeted programmes and initiatives to improve educational provision
18. We are investing in the wider school and college workforce and funding evidence-
based interventions that can be delivered to all pupils and students who need them,
including those with SEND. This includes:
Continuing the National Tutoring Programme. To improve the tutoring experience
for children and young people with SEND, schools can request SEND specialists,
maintain smaller group sizes for pupils with SEND, and align tutoring provision with
EHCP requirements.
Offering 1:1 tuition and small group support for SEND students and those with
EHCPs through the 16-19 tuition fund, which covers vocational and academic
subjects, to provide the skills and learning in preparation for adulthood.
Additional teaching and learning hours in 16-19 education. To ensure those aged
16 - 25 with an EHCP can benefit, institutions have flexibility to deliver additional
hours or appropriate alternative support for these students.
Supporting schools to provide a high-quality curriculum, by establishing Oak
National Academy as an arm's length body to provide evidence-based, adaptable
curriculum resources. Oak's existing resources include specialist lessons for pupils
56
with SEND and therapy-based lessons covering occupational, physical and speech
and language therapy.
Tackling attendance barriers for pupils with SEND. We know some pupils find it
harder to attend school or alternative provision, so may require individualised
attendance support at a higher level to their peers. Our new guidance, 'Working
together to improve attendance', supports schools, multi-academy trusts and local
authorities to work collaboratively to address the in- and out-of-school barriers to
attendance (e.g. unmet SEND need) children and their families may be facing.
Continuing the Accelerator Fund for another three years following its inception in
2021/22. This includes expanding English hubs to 680 additional schools in areas
that will benefit most from specialist phonics support and mathematics hubs
projects to help pupils to secure the foundation they need to progress, and which
may have been missed due to Covid-19.
Equipping SENCos to shape their school's approach through a
new SENCo NPQ
19. Special educational needs co-ordinators (SENCos) play a vital role in setting the
direction for their school, coordinating day-to-day SEND provision and advising on the
graduated approach to providing SEN Support. We want to invest in their training to
ensure they are well equipped, valued by their colleagues and the attainment of
children with SEND improves.
20. Currently, SENCos must complete the mandatory National Award for SEN Co-
ordination (NASENCo) within 3 years of taking the role¹³. To ensure the qualification
provides the skills needed for the role, aligns with wider teacher training reforms and is
completed consistently, the green paper proposed introducing a new mandatory
leadership level SENCo National Professional Qualification (NPQ) and strengthening
the mandatory timeframe requirement in which the qualification must be undertaken.
21. We heard through the consultation that introducing a new NPQ sends an important
message about the role of the SENCo and the need for it to be "whole-school, senior
and strategic" whilst reflecting the complexity of the system and preparing SENCos for
this. Where respondents saw disadvantages, it was because they felt that the current
qualification is fit for purpose and that changing the type of qualification risks
undermining the SENCo role. We heard consistently that there was strong support for
strengthening the mandatory requirement to undertake SENCo training.
13 if they had not previously been a SENCo at that or any other relevant school for more than twelve months prior to
September 2009.
57
22. We intend to replace the NASENCo with a mandatory leadership level SENCo NPQ for
SENCos that do not hold the current qualification, including those that became a
SENCo prior to September 2009. To ensure the NPQ is high-quality and provides the
knowledge, practical skills and leadership expertise needed for the role, we will work
with SEND experts to develop the NPQ framework and course design. We are
determining arrangements for the transition from the NASENCo to the SENCo NPQ
and as part of this, we will consider how the proposal to strengthen the mandatory
training requirement is implemented. We will ensure that any strengthened timeframe
requirement aligns with teacher recruitment cycles, that the availability of training
places meets demand, and that the responsibility for ensuring the SENCo has the
relevant training sits at the right level within a school.
23. Further details on the timings for the procurement to identify providers of the NPQ and
the approach for introducing the new qualification will be provided in due course.
Ensuring SEND expertise is held at every level
24. As well as the crucial role played by SENCos, we heard about the importance of SEND
expertise being held at every level, including senior leaders. Senior leaders play a key
role in setting an inclusive culture, in which individual needs are identified and where
there are high ambitions for children and young people with SEND and in alternative
provision. To support excellent SEND leadership, we have:
Committed to setting out the first descriptors for academy trust strength, which will
include measures for a high-quality, inclusive education. This will help ensure that
trust leaders set the right calm, safe and supportive culture for inclusion and
improving the outcomes of pupils with SEND and in alternative provision.
Begun work on a new MAT CEO development offer, providing leaders with the
knowledge, skills and behaviours to lead improvement at scale, with the needs of
children with SEND and those requiring alternative provision embedded throughout.
Introduced a new NPQ for Early Years Leadership to support current and aspiring
leaders to develop expertise in leading high-quality early years education and care
which meet the needs of all learners, including those with SEND.
Developed the NPQ for Headship to support teachers and leaders to develop the
knowledge that underpins expert school leadership and enables all pupils to
succeed, including designing and implementing fair and inclusive policies, making
reasonable adjustments and encouraging staff to share best practice on supporting
pupils with SEND.
Provided training and capability building to senior strategic leaders in local
authorities through the Delivering Better Value Programme, supporting them to
design, implement and embed effective change management and evidence-based
decision-making.
58
Promoted the Local Government Association Leadership Programme, which
provides targeted support to senior leaders in local authorities with responsibility for
children's social care. SEND is embedded throughout the programme including
training, mentoring and bespoke support to deliver targeted interventions to improve
their SEND services.
Embedding support from early years to further education
Supporting early years staff to meet need through high-quality early years provision
25. During the consultation, respondents highlighted the crucial role of high-quality early
years support in preventing unnecessary escalation of need and providing children with
a strong foundation for their future educational journey.
26. Early years staff play a critical role in providing high-quality support for all children to
help them reach their potential and avoid learning difficulties arising. To support those
children who do have additional needs, the Department for Education committed to
funding training for up to 5,000 early years staff to gain an accredited Level 3 EY
SENCo qualification. Training will run until August 2024, and we have already had over
4,000 applications for the course. Training is available to all SENCos working in group-
based and childminder settings, with additional targeting to specific areas based on
levels of disadvantage.
27. In response to feedback from the sector, we have also undertaken a review of the
Early Years Educator (EYE) Level 3 criteria. We have consulted on the inclusion of
SEND as a standalone criterion, to ensure that all EYE courses include a specific focus
on supporting children with SEND. The consultation response will be published in
spring 2023.
28. These changes are being taken forward as part of the Early Years Recovery
Programme, which provides a package of up to £180 million of workforce training,
qualifications and support for the early years sector. As well as SENCo training and
EYE reform, the programme includes:
funding for up to 10,000 professionals to undertake early mathematics, early
communication and language, and personal, social and emotional development
training through the third phase of our Professional Development Programme. The
previous phase provided more than 1,300 professionals in 51 local authorities with
bespoke training, improving the support received by an estimated 20,000 children.
the National Professional Qualification in Early Years Leadership (NPQEYL), which
includes SEND training.
the introduction of up to 18 new Stronger Practice Hubs to support early years
practitioners to adopt evidence-based practice improvements, build local networks
for sharing effective practice and cultivate system leadership.
59
A skilled, confident further education workforce
29. Further education (FE) plays a vital role in preparing learners, including young people
with SEND, for the next phase of their life, including further learning, training and
employment opportunities.
30. The Department for Education's Universal Services programme offers a comprehensive
package of SEND training and support for the FE workforce, including employer-led
webinars advising on how settings can prepare young people for adulthood and
employment, and additional FE-focussed webinars which over 700 college staff and
leaders have accessed to date. The programme also offers peer reviews, where
FE leaders are given the opportunity to engage in improvement projects.
31. To provide expert support for young people with SEND in FE, we offered bursaries
worth £15,000 each, tax free, in academic year 2022/2023 for trainees undertaking
SEND Further Education Initial Teacher Education (ITE).
32. Awareness of individual learner needs, and how to respond to these through effective
teaching practice, is also a key component of the revised Learning and Skills Teacher
(LST) occupational standard. We will require all publicly funded FE ITE programmes to
be clearly based on the LST occupational standard from academic year 2024/25, to
help to ensure that all those training to teach in FE can effectively recognise and
support learners with SEND.
33. To support recruitment across the FE sector, Taking Teaching Further (TTF) is a
Department for Education funded initiative that helps FE providers recruit and train
experienced business and industry professionals to become FE teachers. TTF has
been expanded to include a 'core skills' element, which includes SEND. The aim is to
equip industry experts to support learners with SEND into employment in one or more
of the 15 technical areas.
34. By March 2023 our FE governance guide will also include the expectation that the
governing body of every FE college corporation should have a SEND link governor,
who would have a particular interest in the needs of students with SEND.
Providing specialist support at the point of need
35. We are committed to improving the supply, training and deployment of key workforces,
to make the best use of professional expertise, at whatever age or stage it is needed,
and prevent needs from escalating. Our aim is to harness the expertise of each
workforce to create a virtuous cycle where the roles and responsibilities of different
professionals and sectors are complementary. National Standards will play a key role
in this by clarifying who is responsible for delivering provision and from which budgets.
60
36. The green paper recognised that children and young people need access to the right
specialists but are currently facing delays in accessing this professional support.
Through the consultation, we heard further about the challenges presented by long
waiting times and staff shortages when it comes to receiving support from specialists.
37. In the green paper, the Department of Health and Social Care committed to working
with the Department for Education, NHS England and Health Education England to
commission analysis to better understand demand for support for children and young
people with SEND from the health workforce so that there is a clear focus on SEND in
health workforce planning. The analysis will cover key allied health professionals,
including speech and language therapists and occupational therapists.
38. Building on this analysis, the Department of Health and Social Care and the
Department for Education will work together to take a joint approach to SEND
workforce planning, informed by a stronger evidence base. We will establish a steering
group in 2023 to oversee this work, which will feed into the National SEND and
Alternative Provision Implementation Board, and aim to complete it by 2025.
Increasing the number of educational psychologists
39. We know that educational psychologists play a critical role for children and young
people with SEND - in the EHCP assessment and review system, but also in providing
early identification and intervention to support the needs of children and young people,
and prevention of escalation.
40. In response to the consultation, we heard about the difficulties in securing timely
access to educational psychologists. In the green paper we outlined the steps we are
taking to increase the number of educational psychologists, including our investment of
£30 million to train three cohorts which started in academic years 2020, 2021, and
2022.
41. Since the green paper was published, we have announced a further £10 million for a
cohort of over 200 trainee educational psychologists starting this year, and a further
£21 million to fund 400 more trainees, commencing in 2024 and 2025.
Access to therapists in areas of need
42. There is strong evidence that without receiving the right support early to address
speech, language and communication needs (SLCN), children are at increased risk of
poor educational attainment, poor social emotional and mental health and poor
employment outcomes. In partnership with NHS England, we will include Early
Language and Support For Every Child (ELSEC) pathfinders within our £70 million
Change Programme by supporting 9 ICBs and one of the local areas within each of our
9 Regional Expert Partnerships to trial new ways of working to better identify and
support children with SLCN in early years and primary schools.
61
43. The aim of the ELSEC pathfinders is to:
provide earlier identification and support to children and young people with SEND to
reduce the number of children and young people requiring an EHCP to have their
needs met.
build evidence of new ways of working to better and earlier identify and support
children with SLCN that could be rolled out more widely.
test the impact on pupil outcomes such as attendance, attainment, behaviour,
mental health and wellbeing over the 2 years of the pilot.
44. This will build on existing initiatives to increase the supply of speech and language
therapists and occupational therapists to the NHS. Since September 2020, all eligible
undergraduate and postgraduate degree students have been able to apply for a non-
repayable training grant of a minimum of £5,000 per academic year, with further
financial support available for childcare, accommodation and travel costs.
45. Local inclusion plans will also set out each area's strategic approach to ensuring
sufficient education workforces to deliver effective services.
Training teachers of children and young people with sensory impairments
46. We are committed to ensuring a secure supply of teachers of children and young
people with visual, hearing and multi-sensory impairments in both specialist and
mainstream settings. The importance of these roles came through clearly in
consultation feedback and we recognise concerns regarding the number of Teachers of
the Deaf.
47. Those teaching classes of children with sensory impairments must hold an appropriate
qualification approved by the Secretary of State - the Mandatory Qualification for
Sensory Impairment (MQSI). Teachers working in an advisory or peripatetic role are
also strongly advised to complete MQSI training, in the best interests of the children
and young people with whom they work.
48. To support the supply of teachers with an MQSI, we have already developed a new
approval process to determine providers of MQSIs from the start of the academic year
2023/24 and issued contracts. The Institute for Apprenticeships and Technical
Education (IfATE) are also developing an occupational standard for teachers of
Sensory Impairment. This will open up a paid, work-based route into teaching children
and young people with sensory impairments by enabling people to undertake high-
quality apprenticeships. This will improve the supply of those qualified to teach this
important cohort and further help to improve their outcomes. The apprenticeship will
attract levy funding, meaning those wanting to undertake it would be funded to do so
whilst being in paid work. This will help to open up the profession to individuals from
lower socio-economic backgrounds. IfATE are working with universities, local
authorities and sector representatives, including the National Deaf Children's Society,
62
the Royal National Institute of Blind People and the British Association of Teachers of
Deaf Children and Young People to develop the qualification, and expect it to be
available from 2025. In addition to this, the Department for Education are exploring
further options to maximise take up of MQSIs with a view to improving the supply of
teachers for children with sensory impairments.
Building the health workforce through expanded apprenticeship routes
49. As chapter 3 outlines, we are delivering an extensive package of professional
development to the apprenticeship provider workforce. Alongside this offer, our wider
work to support growth in apprenticeships is enabling us to support the growth of the
health and care workforce. We have seen strong growth of registered nursing degree
apprenticeships in recent years, with 3,420 starts in 2021/22, compared to 1,040
in 2018/19¹⁴.
50. There is now a complete apprentice pathway in nursing from entry to
postgraduate advanced clinical practice - for example, a person could join the NHS as
a Level 2 Healthcare Support Worker apprentice, progress to a Level 5 Nursing
Associate apprenticeship, then onto an accelerated Level 6 Registered Nurse
Degree Apprenticeship. Health Education England have worked with NHS Trusts to
support Nursing Associates' progress onto Registered Nurse apprenticeships -
completing one or two years more quickly than their counterparts coming through the
typical apprenticeship. People wanting to train as a doctor could achieve their degree
by an apprenticeship route from 2023/24, which aims to widen access and participation
in undergraduate medical education and deliver better care to patients through a
diverse workforce that is more representative of local communities.
51. NHS England are developing a long-term plan for the NHS workforce that will look at
the mix and number of staff needed in the future. The plan focusses on the practical
action the NHS will look to take, working with partners in government, to grow and
transform the workforce, and continue to embed compassionate and inclusive cultures.
This includes continuing to grow apprenticeship opportunities from entry level to
postgraduate advanced clinical practice. The Department for Education are working
with The Department of Health and Social Care to support the growth of
apprenticeships needed for the long-term workforce plan.
52. By 2024/25, we will increase investment in apprenticeships across all sectors to
£2.7 billion, in addition to making up to £8 million available in 2022-23 to
Higher Education Institutions to expand their degree apprenticeships provision.
14 Apprenticeships and traineeships, Department for Education 2022, Table: Subjects and levels - standards and
frameworks
63
Bringing services together
53. We know that for children and young people with complex needs, joined up working
across health, education and care services is particularly important, to support both
early identification of needs, and to make sure the right support is put in place as early
as possible. We will build upon the good practice initiated through cross-Government
commitments in the NHS Long-Term Plan and, for autistic children and young people
and those with a learning disability, the Building the Right Support Action Plan (July
2022), to drive faster progress. The Building the Right Support Action Plan brings
together actions across government and public services to strengthen community
support and reduce overall reliance on mental health inpatient care.
54. Building on last year's investment of £13 million, NHS England are investing £2.5
million in 2022/23 and £1.5 million in 2023/24 to improve autism diagnostic pathways.
NHS England are also developing national guidance for Integrated Care Systems
about how to improve access to an autism diagnosis assessment.
55. The NHS Long-Term Plan also set out that, by 2023/24, children and young people
with a learning disability and/or who are autistic with the most complex needs will have
a designated keyworker, implementing the recommendation made by Dame Christine
Lenehan. 15 Initially, keyworker support will be provided to children and young people
who are inpatients or at risk of being admitted to a mental health hospital. Keyworker
support will also be extended to the most vulnerable children with a learning disability
and/or autism.
56. The community Keyworking model was developed through extensive consultation with
young people, parent carers and other stakeholders, and what families said mattered
has been written into the framework for what Keyworkers must deliver. Keyworking
services make sure that local systems are responsive to fully meeting the young
people's needs in a joined-up way to provide care and treatment in the community with
the right support, whenever it is possible. The Keyworking services established in the
pilot and early adopter phases within health, local authority or voluntary and community
sector hosts actively bring together support to avoid admission, facilitate robust support
on discharge and achieve positive outcomes for children and young people and their
families. The model is now being rolled out across all areas.
57. To improve early identification, the Department for Education has also invested
£600,000 into significantly expanding an autism early identification pilot in at least 100
schools over 3 years, including 10 currently running in Bradford. A 'neurodiversity
profiling tool' will empower schools to provide early support for children's needs and
decrease the downstream pressures across the system. The Department for Education
15 These are our children. Council for disabled children.
www.ncb.org.uk/sites/default/fies/field/attachment/These%20are%20Our%20CHildren_Lenehan_Review_Report.pdf
64
has since developed a series of 'Pathfinders' into four new areas, seeking to
understand potential for further development.
Case Study- NHS England Autism in Schools Project
The Autism in Schools project was co-produced by NHS England, parent carer forums and
local authorities in North Cumbria and the North East to support autistic children and
young people by creating positive environments that support mental health. The project
was rolled out in over 300 schools across 26 ICBs in England between 2021/22 and 22/23,
following a successful pilot in North Cumbria and the North East, and continues to have
positive outcomes for children and young people, families and schools.
Projects were based on bringing education, health and social care services together,
providing learning opportunities for school staff, and developing the support available to
autistic children and young people. As part of this, most of the schools undertook
environmental assessments, also referred to as a sensory audit or learning walk. These
explored the sensory aspects of the school environment and were led by occupational
therapists, educational psychologists, mental health support teams and local charities.
School staff reported that engagement with the project has made them more open to
change, helped them feel empowered to better support the needs of autistic children and
young people and supported them to develop stronger relationships with parents, carers
and other professionals within the system. Schools also reported finding the whole school
training on neurodiversity delivered through the projects especially helpful in allowing them
to make reasonable adjustments that support young people to engage in learning, such as
low stimulus areas in classrooms, time out passes and individual resource boxes.
Alongside these practical adjustments, schools also reviewed policies and made changes
to behavioural and uniform policies to meet the needs of neurodiverse learners.
58. The Health and Care Act 2022 introduces a new requirement for CQC registered
providers to ensure their staff receive specific training on learning disability and autism,
which is appropriate to their role. To support this new training requirement, the
government have made significant progress on the Oliver McGowan Mandatory
Training, which was trialled in England during 2021 with over 8000 people. Part one of
this training - an e-learning package - became available in November 2022.
Providing mental health support to children and young people
59. Meeting children's social, emotional and mental health (SEMH) needs is a crucial
aspect of strong SEND provision. Schools and colleges play a vital role in promoting
and supporting pupil and student mental health and wellbeing. They work to create
safe, calm, supportive and inclusive environments, tackle bullying and teach pupils and
students about their mental health and about when to ask for help. Through daily
interactions, staff can validate children's feelings, boost their confidence and increase
65
their resilience. Many education settings also offer targeted support, for example
through play therapy or counselling or a nurture or social skills group.
60. However, as the NHS Long-Term Plan recognised before the pandemic, we know
many families, children and young people struggle to get timely access to additional
specialist support from mental health services.
61. Investment in NHS children and young people's mental health services is growing
faster than both NHS funding and mental health investment overall, and the specialist
workforce has been growing as a result. A £79 million funding boost in 2021/22 to
expand children's mental health services has helped allow 22,500 more children and
young people to access community health services, on top of growth already planned
in the NHS long-term plan.
62. This funding has also accelerated the roll-out of Mental Health Support Teams
(MHSTs) in schools and colleges, which will be expanded to around 400 operational
teams later in 2023, covering around 35% of pupils in England, and reach around 500
operational teams by 2024.
63. Setting teams up involves training a new workforce of Education Mental Health
Practitioners to work across health services and schools. This is part of an additional
all-age investment of £2.3 billion a year into NHS mental health services by 2023/24.
Part of this investment will enable an additional 345,000 children and young people to
access NHS-funded mental health support.
64. The independent process evaluation of the Children and Young People's Mental Health
Support Team Trailblazer Programme identifies substantial progress in MHST
implementation, despite challenges presented by the pandemic. Pupils and students
had positive experiences of the first 25 MHST Trailblazer sites it examined, and school
and college staff grew in knowledge and confidence around mental health. The
programme has evolved since the Trailblazers were launched and the findings will
continue to inform the future rollout and mobilisation of MHSTs.
65. To further support positive holistic approaches to promoting and supporting mental
health and wellbeing, we are also offering all state schools and colleges grants to train
a senior mental health lead by 2025, backed by £10 million in 22/23. Over 10,000
schools and colleges - including more than half of state-funded secondary schools in
England - have taken up the offer so far.
66. To supplement the senior mental health lead training, we are developing an online hub
of practical tools and resources to help mental health leads in schools and colleges to
develop and sustain their whole school or college approach to mental health and
wellbeing; and a toolkit to support schools and colleges to plan their pastoral offer for
pupils and students with social, emotional and mental health needs.
66
67. The recently published Children's Social Care Implementation Strategy committed to
reviewing mental health content included in social work qualifications, early career
training and continuous professional development by the end of 2023, including
ensuring identification and response to poor mental health issues is embedded in
workforce training programmes.
Extending the Alternative Provision Specialist Taskforce Pilot (APST)
68. The APST pilot co-locates a diverse specialist workforce in an alternative provision
school, with a blended team of specialists providing wraparound support and early
needs assessment. Youth and family workers build trust with pupils and families;
speech and language therapists develop pupils' communication skills; post-16 coaches
support aspirational transitions; youth justice workers prevent offending and
reoffending; and mental health therapists improve social and emotional regulation. The
APST pilot addresses a critical gap in the evidence on effective practice models in
alternative provision by evaluating the impact of embedded multidisciplinary specialist
support on attendance, attainment, engagement with education, social and emotional
wellbeing, reintegration into mainstream and post-16 transition.
69. Since November 2021, 22 alternative provision schools have worked with over 2,500
young people. Feedback from APSTs is demonstrating the value of building trusted
relationships and offering timely and accessible support. In addition, co-locating the
core group of specialists is improving staff training and enabling a holistic
understanding of and response to a child's needs. The pilot is being fully evaluated by
independent evaluators in partnership with the Youth Endowment Fund, which will
result in a full impact evaluation 16
70. The APST pilot will now be funded to run until March 2025. An extension to the pilot will
teach us more about the impact on engagement in education, how to secure funding
sustainability and how to recruit and retain specialists. We will incorporate the evidence
from this pilot into the new National SEND and Alternative Provision Standards and
practice guides to ensure expectations for system leaders and frontline professionals
are based on existing best practice. The evidence should also encourage local areas to
consider this model as an effective strand of their SEND and alternative provision
inclusion plans.
71. The APST pilot also provides a valuable opportunity to understand how a specialist
taskforce can develop the role of alternative provision in the wider school landscape.
16 Internal information (metrics and case studies) provided to DfE from AP schools participating in APST pilot
67
Case Study - Alternative Provision Specialist Taskforce pilot: Reuben's* experience
*The name of the student in this case study has been changed
Reuben is in secondary school. His SEND needs include dyslexia, ADHD,
social communication difficulties and learning difficulties. He lives with his mother and his
younger siblings (a toddler and premature new-born), in a one-bedroom flat.
Reuben often does not get to sleep before 1am and is torn between helping his mother
and attending school: his school attendance is historically low. He has a history of
offending behaviour associated with being a victim of child criminal exploitation.
The APST's family worker conducted home visits, made regular phone calls and visited
Reuben at school. The mental health lead gave Reuben's mother safety advice around
managing a new-born child in restricted living arrangements and advised on an approach
to support Reuben's emotional wellbeing. The youth offending worker took Reuben on as a
prevention case, bringing additional intelligence to inform his safety planning.
The APST's interventions have meant that Reuben has been kept safe. While
improvements in Reuben's attendance are still being established, he is engaging and
benefitting greatly from the support of the specialists. The taskforce is also arranging for
him to access speech and language therapy. Reuben is being supported with his post-16
transition options and has now started to look to the future. Looking at possible careers,
Reuben has said he would like to be an engineer in the future.
The role for alternative provision schools in providing early outreach support for
mainstream schools
72. There is also a key role for special and alternative provision schools in providing early
outreach support. This can help mainstream schools with pupils demonstrating
challenging behaviour or having difficulty engaging in their education (see case study
below) and sits alongside the Department for Education's behaviour hubs programme.
Case Study - Alternative Provision Outreach Support
St George's Primary is one of 62 primary schools within Wandsworth local authority where
pupils benefit from local targeted alternative provision outreach support. The funding for
this is provided directly from the local authority as part of its universal SEND offer.
The outreach offer supports around 200 of Wandsworth's most vulnerable pupils. Many
have multiple overlapping needs including contact with social services and SEND
(particularly social, emotional, and mental health needs). The offer includes:
short-term emergency support in response to specific incidents
1:1 support for individual academic, curriculum and behaviour needs including
emotional regulation and literacy, and improving social skills
access to specialist support like mental health services, speech and language
therapists or educational psychologists as part of local "team around the child"
meetings.
68
In St George's this is being delivered in a specially designed in-school nurture space.
The support from the alternative provision school gives its pupils the confidence to engage
in their education within a calm, safe and supportive environment. The school's
headteacher believes that this collaboration has provided valuable support which has
improved the children's wellbeing and reduced the risk of suspension or preventable
permanent exclusion.
Support from Social Care
73. We recognise the importance of aligning SEND reforms with those set out in the
Children's Social Care Implementation Strategy. Together, the reforms are designed to
create a stronger and more stable network of professionals to deliver improved
outcomes for children, young people and their families. This includes strengthening
social worker training through the new Early Career Framework, to ensure social
workers have skills and knowledge to meet the needs of different cohorts of children
and investing in Family Hubs to provide multidisciplinary support.
74. We are developing stronger national guidance for leaders and practitioners through the
Children's Social Care National Framework, setting principles for practice and the
outcomes that children, young people and families should achieve. This approach
reflects the ambition for clear national direction for practice and mirrors the focus on a
consistent and robust offer of support, with help being made available at the earliest
stage without stigma - the same principles which underpin the proposed National
SEND and Alternative Provision Standards. We will develop frontline practice guides,
including for professionals working specifically with disabled children to make sure they
know how to communicate with children with a disability and provide appropriate help
and support to families.
The Designated Social Care Officer Role
75. Many of our proposals, such as standardisation of EHCPs, and introducing multi-agency
panels, will improve integration of services and accessibility of support. In the green
paper, we advocated for the adoption of Designated Social Care Officers (DSCO) and
proposed to use findings from a pilot supported by the Council for Disabled Children to
establish what a high-quality standardised DSCO role would look like.
76. We will strongly encourage the adoption of the DSCO role in each local area, including
by proposing an amendment to the SEND Code of Practice. The job description and
practice expectations for the DSCO will provide the capacity and expertise to improve
the links and contributions from care services into the SEND process. Similarly to the
DCO/DMO role in health, the DSCO role will support both operational input (such as
the contributions from care to Education, Health and Care assessments and reviews)
and more strategic planning functions (such as the commissioning of care services
such as short breaks) for disabled children and those with SEN.
69
Chapter 5: Strengthened accountabilities and clear
routes of redress
1. We have set out a vision for a SEND and alternative provision system where decisions
are made, collectively and consistently by partnerships and informed by robust data
and evidence. This will be underpinned by strengthened accountabilities for all those
responsible for local delivery. We heard consistently throughout the consultation that
current accountability measures are not effective enough. Many respondents felt that
whilst the design of the current system and legal framework is right, more should be
done to hold all elements of the system to account. They told us that if this is
implemented, the support and experiences for children and young people with SEND
would improve and the system overall would be less adversarial for families.
2. We agree that more can be done to make sure statutory duties are delivered. Parents
should have confidence that their children's needs will be met and that local systems
are delivering in line with National Standards, with proportionate and effective action
taken, where required, so that children and young people can achieve the best
outcomes. Parents should also know that if they have a concern, it will be listened to
and resolved in a transparent and efficient way. Our proposals are intended to work
together to drive improvements across the 0-25 system. They are underpinned by
strong local leadership and supported by a culture of effective relationships, mutual
trust and accountability to enable children and young people to get the right support, in
the right place, at the right time.
70
We will:
publish a local and national inclusion dashboard from autumn 2023 to support the
development of local inclusion plans, giving parents improved transparency of local
performance, informing decision-making and driving self-improvement across the
system with ongoing updates and iterations in response to user feedback.
deliver updated Ofsted and Care Quality Commission (CQC) Area SEND
inspections from 2023 with a greater focus on the outcomes and experience of
children and young people with SEND and in alternative provision.
create a ladder of intervention for local areas from 2023, greater powers for the
Secretary of State for Health through the Health and Care Act 2022, and robust
action for all where statutory duties for children and young people with SEND and in
alternative provision are not met, to strengthen accountabilities across all parts of
the system.
require every Integrated Care Board to have a named Executive Board member lead
accountable for SEND.
facilitate a more joined-up response between the Department for Education and
NHS England to improve outcomes and experiences for children and young people
with SEND, including social, emotional and mental health issues, and tackle systemic
failings leading to significant concerns.
strengthen redress for individual disagreements by clarifying who is responsible for
resolving complaints and undertaking further testing of effective mediation
approaches.
set up an expert group to support the development of a bespoke national alternative
provision performance framework.
work with local authority, trust and school leaders to review processes and develop
options for ensuring transparent and effective movement of pupils without EHCPs,
such as those requiring alternative provision, to address behavioural needs.
National and local inclusion dashboard
3. The green paper set out a proposal to establish a national and local inclusion
dashboard that will present timely performance data across education, health and care.
The dashboards will improve public transparency, help to enable better decision-
making at a national and local level and drive self-improvement across local areas. The
metrics in the dashboards will support an assessment of overall system performance
and provide a basis for measuring whether we are achieving our mission of improved
outcomes, better experiences and a financially sustainable system. Ultimately, the
dashboards will help to incentivise the behavioural and cultural change across the
SEND and alternative provision system to achieve maximum impact of reform.
71
4. Respondents welcomed inclusion dashboards as a way of improving their
understanding of what was happening in their local area and as a tool to strengthen
accountability. They noted, however, that there are significant challenges of placing
additional burdens on already stretched services and duplicating various dashboards
that are already produced across local areas, including some which are shared with
local delivery partners such as schools and parents. Where new mandatory data
collections are proposed for the SEND dashboards, they will pass through the Single
Data List procedure, which assesses whether a proposed data collection is genuinely
necessary; non-duplicative; comparable and coherent with all other data collections;
places a minimal burden on local authority data providers; and is fully funded in
accordance with the cross-government 'New Burdens Doctrine'.
5. We also heard the need for caution in selecting the metrics to avoid unintended
consequences, such as increasing the focus on targets or the misinterpretation of data,
as well as ensuring that dashboards are triangulated with other forms of intelligence to
develop a fuller understanding. Feedback showed that all stakeholder groups were
opposed to including provider-level data (i.e. for individual early years, schools, further
education or post-16 settings) as part of the dashboards, given other tools exist or are
being developed that fulfil this purpose, such as school and college performance tables.
6. We heard a range of views regarding the metrics to be included in the dashboards and
the needs of the various users. For example, some parent groups highlighted the
importance of the dashboards being easy to understand and wanted it to focus more
on holistic, long-term outcomes and appropriateness of provision, with less focus on
the numbers of pupils in certain types of provision. On the other hand, local authorities
and mainstream providers thought key contextual measures such as the proportion of
children and young people educated in mainstream, were useful for planning with more
functionality to explore data.
7. To ensure we develop a tool that helps us achieve our overall objectives, considers the
various users in the system and sets out relevant and useful metrics, there is a need to
fully test this. We will also seek to address the tensions in the requirements of the
various users. Therefore, we propose to test an initial prototype dashboard from April
2023 with a view to making a fully public version available in autumn 2023. Our
proposed approach to delivery in the financial year 2023 and beyond is set out below.
72
Phase 1
Phase 2
(spring 2023)
(autumn 2023 onwards)
Develop a prototype dashboard that will
Publish a first, fully public version of the
consist of core metrics using existing
inclusion dashboards in autumn 2023.
data to minimise any burdens.
Ongoing assessment to consider
Test the prototype through the Change
updates and future iterations. This could
Programme from April 2023 to develop
include new metrics and frequent data
a greater understanding of who users
collection, supported by the long-term
are, what they are using the dashboard
digitisation of EHCP processes.
for and their needs.
Consider whether a fuller, more
sophisticated dashboard is needed.
8. In addition, the Further Education (FE) Performance Dashboard, proposed as part of
FE Accountability Reforms in the 'Skills for Jobs' White Paper, will show skills-related
outcomes for FE learners at provider level, including breakdowns by SEND learners.
More detail about the FE Performance Dashboard is set out in the Department for
Education's FE Funding and Accountability consultation which ran from July to October
2022. Subject to user testing, the FE Performance Dashboard is currently planned to
go live by the end of the 2023/24 academic year.
Strengthened accountabilities to enforce statutory
responsibilities and drive better outcomes and experiences
9. Through the consultation, we heard that current accountabilities are too weak, and
families have to battle the system to get support. The new National Standards and local
partnerships and plans will provide clarity in the system and encourage people to work
together, but we know there is a need for stronger incentives and better enforcement
for local areas, including providers, to meet statutory duties.
10. Our measures seek to have an impact across the local system to enable the delivery of
improved outcomes and experiences for children and young people from 0-25 years
old. Families should feel confident that all parts of the system will be held to account
and appropriate action will be taken to prevent and tackle failures. They should also
feel confident that where issues arise, there are clear and effective routes of complaint
so that the right support is provided as soon as possible.
11. Across local areas we are strengthening accountabilities for local authorities, schools,
colleges and multi-academy trusts in the following ways:
Updated Ofsted/CQC area SEND inspections: In January 2023, Ofsted and the
Care Quality Commission introduced a new approach for area SEND inspections.
73
These place greater emphasis on the outcomes that are being achieved for children
and young people, look more closely at children under 5 and those aged 16-25
years old and include alternative provision for the first time. It will have three
possible inspection outcomes providing more nuanced judgements for areas to
better inform a Department for Education response into local areas. Finally, as part
of the framework, there will be a series of thematic visits each year, with the first
focusing on alternative provision, publishing in autumn 2023.
In 2023, the Department for Education will adjust its response to poor performance,
in line with the new joint Ofsted/CQC area SEND inspection framework, so that
it can act proactively when areas fail to provide the necessary support to meet the
needs of children and young people, including the removal of service control and
imposition of a trust or commissioner on local authorities, where required. We will
develop a holistic new ladder of intervention for local areas, with a focus on creating
financial sustainability and improving outcomes for children and young people,
based on evidence and data, including data in the new inclusion dashboards and
delivery of local inclusion plans alongside inspection outcomes.
In addition, in 2023, we will evaluate the full evidence base of where statutory duties
are met and not met across the local SEND and alternative provision system, to
consider mechanisms to ensure we are able to be more robust with any partner that
fails to meet their statutory responsibilities.
Over the next three years, we will continue to support local authorities through
several different improvement programmes to address concerns raised by Ofsted
and CQC, as well as those identified by our expert advisors. These include
improvement programmes such as, targeted performance improvement providing
support to areas in need, sector-led improvement offering peer-to-peer support, the
SEND and Children's Social Care Joint Local Government Association Leadership
Programme focusing on political leadership challenges in local authorities, and what
works in SEND identifying and distributing good practice. The programmes focus
primarily on local authority practice and provision by addressing the underlying
cross-cutting issues affecting SEND performance, including issues around
timeliness and high needs budgetary pressures. The aim is to stabilise the system
and build capacity and capability to respond to long-term reforms. In addition, the
Safety Valve and Delivering Better Value programmes are supporting local
authorities with the biggest deficits to reduce pressure on the high needs budget.
Inspections under Ofsted's 2019 Education Inspection Framework: to be
judged good or outstanding, schools and colleges must show that children and
young people with SEND achieve good outcomes. The school inspection handbook
emphasises that pupils with SEND have different needs and starting points, and
inspectors will expect to see an inclusive culture in all education settings. All
schools, colleges and apprenticeship providers will have at least one inspection
between May 2021 and July 2025. For FE, Ofsted focuses on how well learners
74
with SEND acquire the knowledge and skills they need to succeed in life, through
an ambitious curriculum based on high-quality teaching and training.
Academies Regulation and Commissioning Review: will set out for the first time,
detailed descriptors for academy trust strength which recognise the value that trust-
wide policies and leadership can add to individual schools. These descriptors
include measures for a high-quality, inclusive education, helping to incentivise
leaders to focus on setting the right culture for inclusion and improving the
outcomes of pupils with SEND and in alternative provision across trusts.
The requirement for all schools to publish SEN Information Reports that was
introduced in the Children and Families Act 2014 means that every school now has
published, standardised information about its policy for pupils with SEN. We will
now explore whether the expectations about the contents of the SEN Information
Report could be developed further to improve transparency.
Attendance: The recently published 'Working together to improve school attendance'
guidance sets out clear roles and responsibilities for schools, multi-academy trusts
and local authorities to work together to provide access to early help services and
ensure joined up support for children and their families facing special educational
needs, health or disability related barriers to attendance. In working with their parents
to improve attendance, schools should be mindful of these barriers and put additional
support in place such as pastoral or curriculum support.
12. The Department for Education will also work with health colleagues to strengthen lines
of accountability through health structures by:
Every Integrated Care Board (ICB) will have an Executive Board Lead for
Children and Young People with SEND and Safeguarding, responsible for
supporting the ICB Chief Executive in meeting the legal requirements of relevant
legislation. Statutory guidance will be issued for ICBs in relation to the requirement
for an Executive Lead role for safeguarding and SEND.
Continue to review and bring together the existing functions of Designated
Clinical Officers and Designated Medical Officers. This will provide greater
consistency in the offer this role brings to the local SEND partnership in relation to
the health needs of children and young people with SEND. We will work to maintain
the expertise that Designated Clinical Officers and Designated Medical Officers
bring to the role and consider whether Designated Health Officer is the most
appropriate title.
Facilitating a more joined up response between Department for Education and
NHS regional and national teams to improve outcomes and experiences for
children and young people with SEND and tackle systemic failings leading to
significant concerns.
75
Strengthened redress and mandatory mediation
13. Throughout the consultation, many families told us that they felt they needed to go
through a lengthy, stressful and often expensive appeals process to secure support for
their child.
14. The delivery of National Standards, improved co-production with families and
strengthened accountabilities will make it clearer for families what support should be
provided and by whom. These improvements should help to prevent disagreements
arising in the first place.
15. To help maintain positive relationships locally, we will refresh the model set for co-
production at a local level including clear and transparent communication with parents.
This will set out expectations for how local areas should work with families in their area
to engage constructively and, as a result, prevent issues from escalating. We will also
continue to offer training and support, via our contracted delivery partners, to SEND
Information, Advice and Support Services (SENDIASS). SENDIASS provide valuable
support and free advice to families of children with SEND, and to local areas to resolve
disputes early and at formal stages. We will work with our partners to promote the
published minimum standards for SENDIASS services and consider with our partners
whether the minimum standards should be incorporated into the SEND Code of Practice.
16. When families feel that the service they have received from the local authority has not
been good enough, such as deadlines being missed, there are existing routes to seek
redress, such as the Local Government and Social Care Ombudsman (LGSCO). To make
it clearer for families how SEND-related concerns and complaints should be dealt with, we
will amend the SEND Code of Practice so that it is clearer about who is responsible for
resolving concerns. We will set out the routes of escalation if families remain unhappy
with the way their concerns have been addressed. To inform this, we will look at what the
role of the LGSCO, who consider complaints against local authorities, should be in a
reformed SEND system. Additionally, the upcoming Academies Regulation and
Commissioning Review will look at removing the duplication of processes between
different bodies, improving the experience for trusts, schools and parents.
17. Data on complaints and appeals will be made transparent through national and local
inclusion dashboards and be used, alongside other metrics, to monitor performance
across areas and drive improvements.
18. For appeals about decisions regarding EHC needs assessments and plans, we proposed
in the green paper to make mediation a mandatory part of the Tribunal appeals process.
The consultation showed some support for mediation and giving it a greater role to play in
redress. We also heard that for mediation to be effective, it needs to be high-quality.
However, there were concerns about how making mediation mandatory could lengthen
the resolution process for cases that do need to go to Tribunal and how this could delay
children and young people with SEND receiving appropriate support.
76
19. Mediation can help narrow areas of dispute and pave the way for an agreement to be
reached. It is usually much quicker than going through a Tribunal process and can help
to prevent the additional stress that can come from preparing a case for Tribunal. To
ensure that mediators understand the SEND system and are properly equipped to
understand all views and appropriately guide families through the process, we will review
and build on existing professional standards for SEND mediators. Local authorities will
remain responsible for commissioning and funding mediation at no cost to families.
20. We will further improve the quality of mediation and ensure it offers a good service to
families by:
Phase 1 2023
Phase 2 2024
(autumn)
(autumn)
Working with the Civil Mediation
Clearly setting out what processes
Council, the College of Mediators, other
should be followed by education,
sector partners and families to review
health and care partners locally.
and build on the professional standards
Setting out how the mediation process
for SEND mediators.
will be monitored to give families
Improving the information, advice
confidence in it.
and guidance available to families
on mediation.
Evaluate the outcomes and impacts
of mediation.
21. We will continue to explore options for strengthening mediation and will test and
evaluate approaches further before deciding whether to bring forward legislation to
make these strengthened processes statutory and make mediation mandatory. We will
be more effective at using data on how mediation is carried out locally to inform
intervention activity and will take action where local areas are not participating in
mediation as required.
22. The SEND Tribunal is an important backstop for cases that cannot be resolved through
early dispute resolution. Resolving more cases via early dispute resolution and
mediation will enable the SEND Tribunal to hear cases more quickly than it does now
and improve the experience for families who need it. It will also enable more local
authority resource to be focussed on providing direct support to families rather than on
the administrative burden of preparing for Tribunal cases.
23. The SEND Tribunal also hears disability discrimination claims against schools. In the
green paper we set out that we wanted to explore how well the Tribunal's remedies in
disability discrimination cases against schools were working in practice. Throughout the
consultation, we heard calls for more guidance to increase awareness of schools'
duties under the Equality Act 2010 to prevent discrimination, as well as some feedback
that the remedies available to the Tribunal in disability discrimination cases should go
77
further by enabling financial compensation to be awarded. We will seek to prevent
discrimination from arising in the first place by supporting schools to comply with their
duties under the Equality Act 2010. We will also further consider our policy on how
disability discrimination claims against schools are dealt with.
A bespoke alternative provision performance framework
24. Measures used to indicate the performance of mainstream schools do not work well
for alternative provision schools. Pupils entering alternative provision will do so having
disengaged with education and have significant gaps in their learning, and alternative
provision schools will often only have a short time to work with pupils to address those
issues. This lack of clear measures specific to the needs of pupils in alternative
provision schools makes it hard for those schools to assess where they need to
make improvements.
25. To improve the quality of alternative provision based on our new vision for a three-tier
service, we proposed to introduce a bespoke alternative provision performance
framework based on five named metrics. This would be designed to set robust
standards focused on aspects such as increased attendance, attainment, re-integration
into mainstream education or progression to sustainable post-16 destinations.
Respondents from alternative provision settings, and their commissioners, offered the
greatest support and agreement to this proposal. There was also a positive response
to setting up an expert group to help improve alternative provision data and
performance information at both provider and local level, so that it supported the
inclusion of alternative provision into Area SEND inspections. We will set up this expert
group as a next step in developing an alternative provision performance framework.
Greater oversight of pupil movements
26. The majority of schools and local authorities act appropriately in facilitating the
movement of pupils without EHCPs, for example when children and young people
require alternative provision to address behavioural needs. In most areas, local
authorities and schools work well together to secure the right places for children, but
this does not happen everywhere, and some pupil movement is opaque. A lack of clear
oversight can lead to children being placed in settings that don't meet their educational
needs. At the most extreme, they may be missing education altogether, putting already
vulnerable children at greater risk. Feedback from the consultation consistently
identified a lack of joint working as one of the main weaknesses in the current system.
Poor partnership arrangements can also work against our three-tier model for
alternative provision, acting as a block to reintegrating children when they are ready
to return to mainstream education.
78
27. We will work with local authority, trust and school leaders to develop options for
ensuring transparent decision-making on pupil movement with the child's best interest
at heart. These will include arrangements for fair access panels, and will be in line with
new National Standards around the role of specialist and mainstream schools in
making arrangements for alternative provision. Alongside this, where a school place
has not been secured through fair access, we will look at how we can make the
process of applying to the Secretary of State for a direction to admit as effective as
possible. We will keep the effectiveness of these changes under review and will
consider further powers around the placement of children if we need to go further to
ensure there are safe and appropriate placements for every child.
Unregistered alternative provision
28. We recognise the need to strengthen protections for children and young people in
unregistered alternative provision settings, so that every placement is safe and has
clear oversight. To find the right solution, we launched a call for evidence on the use of
unregistered alternative provision, which closed on 30 September 2022. We have seen
responses that reflect small, flexible provision being able to address individual need in
supporting children and young people to engage with education. We have also heard
powerful testimony from young adults who feel their life chances were transformed
through attending non-school settings.
29. In some local areas there are strong delivery models, for example, with close
management by local authorities or alternative provision schools, of frameworks
offering quality assured providers, backed up by strong attendance management
systems, safeguarding controls and support for wider development. However, this
approach is not enough on its own. It can only be effective alongside rigorous oversight
of pupil placements and continual attention to the needs of the child. In the best
systems, planning for the end of the placement begins at the outset, with a focus on the
pupil's progression back into mainstream education.
30. We are analysing responses to the call for evidence whilst having further conversations
with providers, commissioners and users on potential implications of the proposals,
such as restricting the use of unregistered settings to part-time or time-limited
placements, and how such placements should complement education in school. We
will set out further proposals as they develop. Separately, for the limited and
exceptional cases where commissioners deem full-time online alternative provision to
be in the child's best interest, the Department for Education has launched an Online
Education Accreditation Scheme for those providers.
79
National SEND and Alternative Provision
Implementation Board
31. The green paper proposed setting up a National SEND and Alternative Provision
Implementation Board to hold partners to account for the timely development and
improvement of the system. Following feedback we heard throughout the consultation,
we will establish the National SEND and Alternative Provision Implementation Board,
comprised of parents, sector leaders across education including schools, early years
and post-16, health and care and local and national government. The board will be
jointly chaired by the Minister for Children, Families and Wellbeing and the
Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for Mental Health and Women's Health Strategy.
32. The purpose of the Board will be to oversee the implementation of this Improvement
Plan. It will be informed by data and sector views, the needs and views of children,
young people and parents will be central to its work, and it will embrace the principles
of co-production in how it operates. It will draw from, and promote, good practice to
lead and drive change across the SEND and alternative provision sector.
33. The Board will also receive regular input from a wide range of stakeholders, including
children, young people and parents, and from groups that have been set up to inform
the development of specific system reforms. The Board will publish updates on
progress in delivery against this Plan for children, young people and parents.
80
Chapter 6: A financially sustainable system delivering
improved outcomes
1. The new single national SEND and alternative provision system should deliver
consistent, clear and early support for children and young people with SEND and
provide financial sustainability. The system should enable local partners to work
together effectively with families to deliver for children and young people. Each partner
should be accountable for playing their part, restoring young people and families' faith
in the support they receive. Alongside record investment in high needs, these reforms
should mean more resources are dedicated to providing timely, effective support early
and as a matter of course in mainstream settings. This should reduce the burden on
parents to have to navigate the lengthy statutory EHC assessment process to
receive support.
2. Through the Change Programme, we will build momentum towards this fairer and
financially sustainable national SEND and alternative provision system that identifies
clear standards for the provision and processes that should be in place for all children
and young people, no matter what their need or where they live. This will help design
and test these policies to ensure they work and do not create any unintended
consequences for families. Meanwhile, we are supporting all local authorities to look at
what positive action can be taken now to deliver high-quality services while bringing
high needs budgets under control, so that local areas are in the best position to deliver
the wider SEND system reform.
3. These reforms will be a significant change to the high needs system and will require
reforms to funding arrangements to support their delivery, for example, by ensuring that
funding allows providers to deliver the expectations set out in the National Standards
efficiently. Clear and transparent processes, which strike the right balance between
national consistency and individual need, will ensure a fairer and clearer system that
takes all voices into account, especially those of children, young people and their
families. Ensuring an appropriate supply of specialist provision will make sure that
high-quality specialist settings are available to those that require them.
81
We will:
increase core school funding by £3.5 billion in 2023-24 compared to the year before,
of which almost £1 billion of that increase will go towards high needs. This means high
needs funding will be £10.1 billion in 2023-24.
support local authorities through the Delivering Better Value and the Safety Valve
programmes and share the best practice from local areas with inclusive and
sustainable high needs provision more widely.
develop a system of funding bands and tariffs so that consistent National Standards
are backed by more consistent funding across the country.
publish a response to the consultation on the schools National Funding Formula in
2023 which includes proposals on funding for SEND, including the notional SEND
budget, and a mechanism for transferring funding to high needs budgets.
develop new approaches to funding alternative provision aligned to their focus on
preventative work with, and reintegration of pupils into, mainstream schools. We will do
this in consultation with mainstream schools, the alternative provision sector and local
authorities.
re-examine the state's relationship with independent special schools to ensure we
set comparable expectations for all state-funded specialist providers.
Fairer, sustainable funding
Supporting local authorities
4. We are supporting all local authorities to look now at what positive action can be taken
to improve the way children and young people's needs are met, prepare for wider
SEND system reform, bring high needs costs under control and address DSG deficits.
This includes the additional funding following the 2022 Autumn Statement, high needs
funding will be rising to £10.1 billion in 2023-24 - an increase of over 50% from the
2019-20 allocations.
5. Despite this level of funding, and the best efforts of local authorities, there continues to
be a significant proportion of local authorities with accumulated DSG deficits, with the
total deficits increasing to over £1 billion by the end of 2020-21. The DSG 'statutory
override' has been extended for a one-off period of three years (up to March 2026) to
allow local authorities the short-term flexibility needed to implement sustainable
change. It is critical that, during this extension, local authorities continue to work with all
parts of the SEND system to put themselves in the best position so that when the
'statutory override' comes to an end, local authorities are able to demonstrate their
ability to deal with remaining DSG deficits. In view of this, we have already begun
supporting local authorities facing particular challenges in delivering their high needs
system for children and young people sustainably. More than half of local authorities
have been invited to join either the Safety Valve programme or the Delivering Better
Value programme.
82
6. The Safety Valve programme, introduced in 2020-21 for those local authorities with the
very highest percentage DSG deficits, requires these local authorities to develop
substantial plans for reform to their high needs systems. With support and challenge
from the Department for Education's SEND and financial experts, authorities produce
plans to rapidly place their system on a sustainable footing by running it more
effectively, working collaboratively with key partners and families to do SO. The Safety
Valve programme has demonstrated that, if a local area's leadership work together, it is
possible for even those areas facing the most acute challenges to create innovative
and viable plans to reach a sustainable position and maintain a focus on high-quality
provision for children and young people with SEND. Steps they have taken to do this
include developing a stronger mainstream offer, improving support for phase
transitions, and ensuring sufficient local places to meet needs.
7. As part of the programme, we expect local authorities' chief executives, chief finance
officers, and Directors of Children's Services to work together on the development of
plans. These plans must also include listening to the experiences of children and young
people and their families, and local authorities must have the support and engagement
of local leaders, schools, parent and carer forums, and other key stakeholders. The
principles of all Safety Valve agreements reflect the need to reach sustainability
through genuine collaboration with partners to ensure children and young people's
needs are met early and appropriately.
8. In 2022, we introduced the Delivering Better Value in SEND programme to target the
55 local authorities who have the next highest percentage DSG deficits after those in
the Safety Valve programme. The programme takes a Diagnostic approach to helping
local authorities identify achievable and sustainable changes that can drive high-quality
outcomes for children and young people with SEND and equip authorities with the tools
to enable them to maintain these changes sustainably, on an ongoing basis.
9. The objective of the Diagnostic is, through robust evidence gathering and wider system
engagement, to support authorities to identify the most impactful changes that can be
made to improve outcomes for children and young people with SEND. Since the
programme started, 20 local authorities have completed the Diagnostic, with inputs
from over 1,800 parents and carers, 500 education providers and professionals, and
700 practitioners across the 20 local systems. The work so far demonstrates that
achievable opportunities exist to improve parent, carer and child experiences while
managing spend more effectively across the SEND system. We will share learning,
insights and best practice from the programme as it progresses.
10. We are seeing that local authorities are able to refocus their resources and provision to
encourage mainstream schools to be more inclusive, ensure needs are met early and
appropriately and use available local provision effectively. We have published a
research report and accompanying guidance to assist local authorities as they make
plans for sustainability, drawing on existing good practice in the sector and learning
from the programmes. The research report shares over 60 case study examples of
83
positive practice found in local authorities and offers advice and recommendations that
can be applied in other local areas. The initial experience from the Safety Valve and
Delivering Better Value programmes, along with this research, has demonstrated that
some local authorities can and should be doing more to manage their systems well and
sustainably. By supporting all local authorities to act now to adopt practices which
support children and young people effectively and sustainably, we can put the system
in the best position in advance of our wider reforms.
Bands and tariffs
11. The green paper acknowledged that to improve financial stability in the system, we
must make the most effective use of high needs funding so that local authorities can
use the record levels of investment to deliver quality support for children and young
people with SEND and balance their high needs budgets. We will introduce a national
framework of banding and price tariffs to support commissioners and providers to meet
the expectations set out in the National Standards. Whilst there will always be some
local variation, to have a consistent, national SEND and alternative provision system
and ensure value for money, we must move to a world where similar types of support
are backed by similar levels of funding. Bandings will cluster specific types of education
provision and tariffs will set the rules and prices that commissioners use to pay
providers to deliver what is set out within the National Standards. This will be
implemented alongside our broader changes to the national funding system and the
development of National Standards. This will ensure that money is targeted to where it
is needed most and incentivise and equip settings to provide high-quality education
provision, thereby improving outcomes of those with SEND.
12. Many stakeholders have welcomed the proposal for a more nationally consistent and
transparent system. Some stated that a national framework will improve consistency
and reduce the administrative burden on settings that accept pupils and students from
multiple local authorities (such as colleges), while others welcomed more transparency
from providers to show how budgets are spent.
13. Many respondents also expressed the importance of ensuring that funding and
spending are designed to meet children and young people's needs, so that national
consistency does not undermine supporting individual needs. This was echoed by
stakeholders who noted that children and young people's needs change over time and
those with the most complex needs may not fit into neat categories or descriptors.
Similarly, some said that a national approach should not cut across personalised
individual decision making. Some stakeholders agreed that need should drive provision
and that any nationalised approach should only help inform funding. We also heard that
a degree of flexibility at a geographical level was necessary, to be able to respond to
different financial landscapes.
84
14. Most local authorities already make use of banded funding arrangements, based on
local levels of available provision and costs. We know that an effective funding system
is one that is consistent but is also flexible, transparent and simple. The introduction of
a national bands and tariffs funding system that sets expectations for the cost and
delivery of provision, with appropriate flexibility, is dependent on other policy proposals,
particularly the development of National Standards, so this will be developed alongside
them. It will be designed to appropriately reflect the needs of children and young
people, including the most complex needs, and to meet the cost of the provision that
they need. It will give providers clarity on how much funding they should expect to
receive in delivering support or a service and enable commissioners to determine the
funding required.
15. We know that currently there is significant variation in the cost of provision across the
country, so, starting in 2023, we will undertake research to gather more information
about the costs of provision and then explore the best way to manage and reduce this
variation as much as possible. To do this we will:
work with commissioners and providers to collect and analyse data on the cost
of provision, which will then be used to inform the development of the bands,
tariffs and funding structures needed to deliver the support set out in the
National Standards.
consider how this research data can be shared with local authorities and providers
to inform local decisions on commissioning and funding.
16. We will look at how we can support local authorities by sharing this data to help inform
their spending decisions. This will help to address some of the current inconsistencies
in spending on high needs, in advance of the implementation of National Standards
and the accompanying tariffs.
17. To further support fairer, sustainable funding, we will continue to work with independent
specialist providers to consider how we can ensure that there is clarity and
transparency about the cost of bespoke packages of support for children and young
people with the most complex needs.
Standardisation of Notional SEND Budgets
18. It is important that mainstream schools are resourced appropriately for making suitable
provision for their pupils with SEND. In August, we published guidance on the notional
SEN budget for mainstream schools that sought to clarify what the current notional
SEN budget is for and how local authorities should review the calculation of that budget
through local funding formula factors.
19. We are progressing towards fully implementing the National Funding Formula (NFF) for
mainstream schools. We consulted in summer 2022 on moving to a direct NFF
whereby all mainstream schools are directly funded via the NFF rather than through
85
150 local school funding formulae. As part of this, we consulted on whether the direct
NFF would identify an indicative SEND budget for schools. Most responses to the
consultation, including the majority of responses from local authorities and schools,
indicated support for the direct NFF to include the identification of an indicative SEND
budget determined by the Department for Education. We will publish more details on
the outcome of this consultation in spring 2023.
20. In moving towards the implementation of the direct NFF for mainstream schools, we
will be looking carefully at what the National Standards say about the SEND provision
that schools should make available. This important first step will inform the level of
funding that schools will need within their total budget to deliver the expected type and
level of provision for their pupils with SEND. We can then work out how best to design
the calculation of the indicative SEND budget for each school.
Funding stability for alternative provision
21. Alternative provision schools face a unique difficulty in accurately predicting pupil
numbers. The link between funding and pupil numbers also presents a potential
perverse incentive to admit and keep pupils when they could receive interventions in,
or return to, mainstream provision. Given these issues, the green paper proposed to
ensure that state-funded alternative provision schools (whether local authority-
maintained pupil referral units or alternative provision academies or free schools) have
the funding security and stability they need to deliver a support service focused on
early intervention. Under this proposal, local partnerships would draw up a plan for
delivering alternative provision in their area and identify the budget that would be
needed to implement the plan over a minimum period of 3 years.
22. This proposal was welcomed across the sector, with consultation responses
recognising the benefits of providing greater certainty. Responses also suggested that
identifying a specific budget for alternative provision would help in local decisions about
how much high needs and other funding should be earmarked for that purpose.
23. We will develop new approaches to the funding of alternative provision, based on the
three-tier system that prioritises preventative work and reintegration of pupils back into
mainstream schools. Funding changes will also need to reflect the role that local
partnerships will play in organising alternative provision for an area and establish a
more stable financial system for those delivering this provision. As we test the changes
in the planning and delivery of alternative provision through the Change Programme,
we will make sure that they are supported by appropriate funding reforms. Before
implementing funding changes nationally, we will carefully consult with those who
provide alternative provision, with mainstream schools that should benefit from their
services and, importantly, with local authorities. Local authorities will remain legally
responsible for arranging suitable education for those without a school place.
86
Post-16 funding
24. We are very conscious of the distinct funding issues for colleges and the further education
sector, and the many calls on the 16-19 disadvantage funding that is partly allocated to
support students with SEND and other additional needs. We have heard a great deal
about the challenges across the sector, including the variable approaches to
commissioning and funding that colleges experience from the local authorities that they
deal with, and, in some cases, the sheer number of authorities that they have to engage
with. We know that reform is needed, and we will continue to work with the college sector
and local authorities as we consider any changes for the future that may be needed, in
addition to the introduction of the National Standards and funding bands and tariffs.
Early years funding
25. In early years, local authorities are required to establish a Special Educational Needs
Inclusion Fund (SENIF) to provide additional top-up funding to providers to improve
outcomes for children with SEND. Funding for the SENIF can come from both the early
years and high needs funding blocks of the DSG. We are very aware that the early
years sector is facing economic challenges - similar to challenges being faced across
the economy - making it more important than ever that the early years funding system
is effectively supporting children with SEND. We will work with local authorities, early
years providers and stakeholders to consider whether changes to the SENIF and other
associated elements of the wider current early years funding system are needed, to
ensure early years SEND funding arrangements are appropriate and well-targeted to
both improve outcomes for all pre-school children with SEND, and to support the
introduction of a national framework for bands and tariffs.
Management of independent special schools
State-funded independent schools
26. The green paper proposed that national bands and tariffs would apply across the whole
range of special education provision, including the independent specialist sector.
Independent special schools represent a third of special schools and support 5% of
pupils with EHCPs (School Census 2022). The sector's funding comes overwhelmingly
from the state, for example in 2022, local authorities placed over 20,000 children and
young people with EHCPs in independent special schools¹⁷ Despite this, the sector is
not treated in the same way as state-maintained specialist provision. Its regulation is
designed for private fee-paying schools. Management is fragmented and small-scale,
based on local authorities' individual pupil placements. This is inefficient for both
commissioners and providers and makes it difficult to assess the overall impact of
independent special schools. Provision can be opened or closed regardless of the
17 Special - Independent, Education, health and care plans, Department for Education, 2022
87
effect on the existing local offer of provision made by schools and colleges, leaving
local authorities to deal with over or under supply.
27. We will re-examine the state's relationship with independent special schools to ensure
the expectations we set are comparable to those on other state-funded specialist
providers. We will work with the sector to consider how they should be aligned with the
new National Standards, defining the provision they offer and bringing consistency and
transparency to their costs. This will mean that independent specialist providers should
be part of local authorities' strategic planning and that decisions about changes to the
supply of their provision should be made through Local Inclusion Partnerships.
28. A number of respondents to the consultation were concerned by the risks of trying to
standardise highly specialised provision. We do not wish to prevent bespoke packages
of support being offered for children and young people with the most complex needs.
However, there should be clarity and transparency about the provision available
including at highly specialised schools and colleges so that children and young people
who need such provision can access it quickly, and to ensure that costs are
reasonable. Our work with commissioners and providers to understand the provision
offered and its costs will therefore ensure that we do prioritise such provision for those
with the most complex needs.
Residential placements for children and young people with complex needs
29. In October 2022, the Child Safeguarding Practice Review Panel published its phase
one findings into safeguarding children with disabilities and complex health needs in
residential settings. The Independent Inquiry into Child Sexual Abuse (IICSA) has also
raised issues such as children's voices not being heard, the different regulatory
standards for residential special schools and children's homes, and the failure of
existing checks and balances. This builds on concerns raised by Dame Christine
Lenehan in her two 2017 reports into children's homes¹⁸ and residential special
schools¹⁹, The evidence submitted to the Independent Review of Children's Social
Care also highlighted that placements for children and young people with complex
needs (often autism, learning disabilities and mental health needs, which can include
behaviour which challenges) are often poorly planned and unavailable locally when
needed. This results in children and young people being placed far from home,
sometimes in placements which are not ideally matched to their needs. A consistent
theme has been that children and young people with complex needs who are placed
far away from home are more vulnerable. These reports also highlight that disabled
children who have difficulty in communicating are at increased risk of abuse. It is vital
that we look at what more can be done for those children and those who are outside
their local area.
18 These are our children: a review by Dame Christine Lenehan, Department of Health and Social Care, 2017
19 Good Intentions, Good Enough? Residential special schools and colleges, 2017
88
30.A significant proportion of the children and young people in residential special schools
are placed there because of challenging behaviour. Residential provision may be the
right way to meet the needs of some children and young people, but it places them at
greater risk by removing them from their families and local support networks. The
proposals set out in this Improvement Plan to increase the capacity of mainstream
schools to meet a wider range of needs, have a key role to play, supported by a
proactive alternative provision outreach programme. This is coupled with the increased
focus from children's social care on Family Help, providing support for parents and
carers and access to services such as short breaks in the child's own community (as
recommended in the Independent Review of Children's Social Care), as well as the
Department of Health and Social Care-led Building the Right Support programme,
which seeks to avoid the need for in-patient mental health provision by making
specialist and intensive support services available where children are. These reforms
seek to meet need at the earliest stage, avoid escalation to crisis situations and enable
children and young people to remain in their families and communities.
31. The Children's Social Care Implementation Strategy seeks to transform the way care is
provided to children and young people, prioritising children's loving relationships in a
home which best meets their needs. It sets out reforms at national, regional and local
level to increase sufficiency, improve standards of care and regulations and move
towards a regional model for providing homes for children. This will have an impact on
residential special schools, including dual-registered 52-week residential special
schools. These reforms include:
reviewing the existing legislation and regulation for all forms of care for looked-after
children and young people and developing a core overarching set of standards.
working with Ofsted and the sector to develop plans for a financial oversight regime,
to increase transparency and to prevent sudden market exit which would disrupt the
lives of children living there.
supporting local authorities with forecasting, procurement and market shaping, and
establishing Regional Care Co-operative (RCC) pathfinders in two areas, which will
plan, deliver and commission homes for children in care across the region.
improving the sufficiency of residential care provision through capital investment.
32. We will work alongside the Children's Social Care Implementation Strategy's RCC
pathfinders to explore how they can best commission and manage residential provision
for children and young people with the most complex needs, and how they should work
alongside Local Inclusion Partnerships. Our commitments to both set up an expert
working group to review all existing legislation and regulation and develop a core
overarching set of standards for all forms of care placements and move to a regional
model of care commissioning, will also contribute to more consistent and better-quality
care placements for both looked-after children and those with complex learning or
disability needs.
89
33. In taking forward our reforms following the SEND and Alternative Provision Green
Paper, the Independent Review of Children's Social Care and the Safeguarding
Children with Disabilities and Complex Health Needs in Residential Settings report, we
have an opportunity to set out a new strategy for children and young people with the
most complex needs (particularly challenging behaviour), building on existing
programmes of activity in SEND, children's social care and the NHS. The Department
for Education is considering how to respond to these system-wide issues.
90
Conclusion
34. This Improvement Plan sets out how we will work alongside children, young people and
their families, and those who work across every part of the SEND and alternative
provision system, to deliver improvements for every child and young person with SEND
and in alternative provision.
35. As we have demonstrated throughout this Plan, there is work underway now to address
the immediate challenges facing the system. We know as well that there are many
areas of the country where there is excellent practice, and children and young people
are receiving the support that they need to succeed. We look forward to continuing to
work with you to spread this practice, as well as testing our longer-term proposals for
systemic reform, so that we can all play our part in supporting children and young
people with SEND and in alternative provision.
91
Annex A - Consultation response summary
During the consultation period we:
held or
spoke
attended
over 60 events
to over
175
were with children, young
people and parents and
4,500
events
carers.
people
Consultation events by sector
Children and young people
Parents and carers
Early years
Voluntary groups
Local government
Higher education
Further education and post 16
Research organistions
Social care
Health
Specialist workforce (e.g. SALTs, EPs)
Alternative provision schools
Special schools
Mainstream schools
Hospital schools
Cross cutting group
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
This table does not add up to 175 as multiple sectors attended some of the same events.
Online consultation
received nearly
15%
6,000
of responses were
received via direct email.
responses
We also received
Parents and carers and
responses from
headteachers/teachers/other
organisations representing
teaching staff collectively
the views of multiple
accounted for 72% of all
stakeholders.
responses.
92
7 separate questions were aimed at children and young people:
162
40%
of responses came
children and young
from those aged
people responded
between 19-25.
Some respondents told us they liked
our proposal to develop a national system with National Standards setting clear and
high expectations for good practice.
our proposals to improve inclusive mainstream provision.
our new vision for alternative provision.
the focus on early intervention.
Some respondents agreed with
our diagnosis of the system - including the existence of a vicious cycle of late
intervention, low confidence and inefficient allocation of resources.
our suggestion that there is a lack of clarity around the responsibilities between
different agencies and therefore too much variation in support - which creates a
postcode and social capital lottery.
Some respondents wanted to hear more about
how proposals would work in practice - this included acknowledging issues with
system capacity.
our plans to ensure the workforce has the training, expertise and support to achieve
our vision for the system.
an inclusive society where every child and young person is set up to thrive.
our plans for early years and post-16 settings and for those who need support from
adult social care.
Some respondents were concerned about
some proposals (like tailored lists) creating a system that does not respond effectively
to the needs of individual children and reduces choice.
some proposals (like mandatory mediation) creating a system that could make it
difficult for families to access support promptly.
93
Annex B - The government's vision for the Special
Educational Needs and Disabilities (SEND) and
Alternative Provision (AP) system and delivery approach
Vision
Our ambition is to create a society that celebrates and enables success in a variety of
forms, with the culture, attitudes and environments to offer every child and young person
the support that they need.
We want the process of accessing support to be dignified and affirmative, focusing on a
child's achievements, talents, and strengths.
Above all, we want to create a system where every child and young person can thrive and
fulfil their potential. This starts with being able to access the right support, in the right
place, at the right time.
Mission
We want all those working across education, health and care to work with local and central
government to:
1. Fulfil children's potential: children and young people with SEND (or attending
alternative provision) enjoy their childhood, achieve good outcomes and are well
prepared for adulthood and employment.
2. Build parents' trust: families find it easier to navigate the system and access support.
They have greater confidence in it, reporting better experiences of a system which is
based on dignity and affirmation. Mainstream settings are seen as being high-quality
and inclusive, valuing those with SEND. Specialist provision is seen to be delivering
effectively and is available locally to those who need it.
3. Provide financial sustainability: local systems deploy their resources effectively such
that spending shifts towards early intervention and away from costly specialist
provision, where this is not required. Local authorities operate within their budgets and
achieve value for money so that record investment in the high needs budget is used
effectively and with evidenced outcomes that are financially sustainable. As a result,
local authorities will be able to deliver high-quality services within budgets.
Values
Our single SEND and alternative provision system is based on 5 core values:
1. Nationally consistent: a system based on a suite of National Standards where
children, young people and their families know what to expect and providers know what
is expected and are accountable for that.
94
2. Evidence-driven: our reforms will ensure decisions around support and placements
are driven by evidence of what works best for the child or young person.
3. Responsive: early identification of need, targeted support to address children and
young people's individual needs and timely access to specialist services and support,
including specialist placements where appropriate.
4. Co-produced: children, young people and their families will be involved in the
decision-making process around the support they receive and in the development of
the policy which drives those decisions.
5. Inclusive: build on the ambition of the Schools White Paper for high-quality, well-led
and inclusive schools with fair access to excellent teaching of evidence-based curricula
in calm, safe and supportive settings, where individual needs are identified and
targeted academic, pastoral or specialist support is given.
Approach
Feedback from the consultation reflected there is both consensus on the urgency to
secure improved outcomes and experiences for children, young people and their families
and that bolder proposals for reform need to be carefully designed and tested in order to
be successful and reduce the risk of unintended consequences.
We will deliver reform in three different ways:
1. Support and stabilise: we will support and stabilise the system, getting local areas
working in the best possible way within the current system to ensure that the needs of
children and young people are met, without escalating costs, and to ensure that local
authority deficits are brought under control. This includes supporting local authorities
with financial deficits through the Delivering Better Value and the Safety Valve
programmes.
2. Addressing supply issues: in the short to medium term, we will take action to
address supply issues - ensuring that there is sufficient support available for children
and young people when they need it, in the most efficient way. This includes investing
£2.6 billion between 2022 and 2025 to deliver new places and improve existing
provision for children and young people with SEND or who require alternative
provision, reducing the need for costly independent provision.
3. Design and test for systemic reform: our £70 million Change Programme will create
up to nine Regional Expert Partnerships that will test and refine longer-term reforms
including developing and testing National Standards, strategic partnerships and
inclusion plans, the alternative provision service and tailored lists. This will build a
strong evidence base to inform future funding and legislation.
95
Annex C - The future Special Educational Needs and
Disabilities (SEND) and Alternative Provision (AP) system
Below we have set out how the changes in the SEND and Alternative Provision
Improvement Plan will benefit children, young people and families, education settings and
local systems.
National Standards
will give clarity to children, young people and families about what
evidence-based support should be in place for their child.
will give clarity to education settings and providers about the provision
they will need to make available for different needs.
will give local authorities and health and care partners clarity about the
support that should be available.
Workforce
children and young people will have access to a highly trained workforce
in their classroom, and from health and care partners.
we will introduce a new leadership level SENCo NPQ (Special
Educational Needs Co-ordinator National Professional Qualification) for
schools, and practice guides will offer evidence-based support for
frontline professionals.
health partners will have increased specialist capacity and local authority
SEND Casework teams will be well placed to deliver high-quality support.
Education, Health and Care
families will engage with a standardised Education, Health and Care Plan
(EHCP) process, with increased use of digital technology, making it
easier to navigate.
for education settings, a standardised EHCP process with increased use
of digital technology will reduce bureaucracy.
Alternative Provision Specialist Taskforces will help deliver wraparound
support in alternative provision schools.
for local systems, each area will be encouraged to have a Designated
Social Care Officer (DSCO). Local multi-agency panels will aid decision
making, with standardised EHCPs.
96
Preparation for Adulthood
children and young people will have improved transitions and access to a
range of suitable, ambitious pathways post-16.
education settings will support children and young people to experience
smoother transitions, due to transition standards.
for local systems, adjustment passports and more Supported Internships
will support more young people into sustained employment and higher
education.
Accountability
families will be part of Local Inclusion Partnerships, and help to develop
local inclusion plans. Strengthened accountability across the system will
increase confidence.
for education settings, inspections under the Education Inspection
Framework must show that children and young people with SEND
achieve good outcomes to deliver a good or outstanding judgement.
for local systems, inclusion dashboards will improve transparency and
inform decision making. Local areas will be held to account under new
Area SEND inspections.
Financial Sustainability
children and young people who need a specialist placement will have
access to a suitable school, promptly.
for education settings, the National Funding Formula will give clarity to
schools and new funding approaches for alternative provision will be
aligned to preventative work.
for local systems, local authorities will be supported to address current
financial deficits and bands and tariffs will give clarity about costs
of provision.
The National SEND and Alternative Provision Implementation Board
oversees the implementation of the SEND and Alternative Provision Improvement Plan,
leading and driving change across the sector.
97
E02864447
978-1-5286-3924-8
