4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
GOV
UK
Ofsted
raising standards
improving lives
Research and analysis
Supporting SEND
Updated 13 May 2021
Applies to England
Contents
Executive summary
Context for research
Methodology
Report structure
Pupil-centred school support
The importance of home-school relationships
Multi-agency collaboration and partnership working
Discussion
Implications
Appendix 1: Detailed methodology
Appendix 2: Data collection instruments
Appendix 3: The case study pupils
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-sen/
1/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
OGL
© Crown copyright 2021
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where
otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-
licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London
TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-
send/supporting-send
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
2/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
Executive summary
Around 1.4 million pupils in English schools have an identified special
educational need (SEN).
[footnote 1]
These range from the most severe to
comparatively minor. Identified numbers have increased for the fourth
consecutive year, from 14.4% of all pupils in 2016 to 15.5% in 2020.
[footnote
2]
Many of these pupils are in mainstream primary and secondary schools.
[footnote 3]
Research suggests that there are varying interpretations and
practices across professionals, schools and local authorities in both SEN
identification and provision.
[footnote 4]
Although recent reports by Ofsted and others [footnote 5] have highlighted
some strengths in the special educational needs and/or disabilities (SEND)
system, there are also significant weaknesses. These include:
gaps in external provision and training
lack of coordination between services
lack of accountability
weak co-production
This study was developed to explore how the needs of children and young
people are met in mainstream schools and how approaches vary between
providers.
We carried out this qualitative case study before the COVID-19
(coronavirus) pandemic with 21 pupils in 7 mainstream schools. These
schools are in 2 different local authorities. We asked the schools to select
the children who participated, mainly so that those who took part felt
confident and comfortable doing SO. Consequently, this study was small
scale and the children are unlikely to be representative of the population of
pupils with SEND in mainstream schools. The results are therefore not
generalisable, in particular, the extent of the presence or absence of
particular experiences found in our sample.
Schools often took a pupil-centred approach when identifying needs
and planning provision, but staff did not always know the pupils well
enough to do this.
Schools worked towards building secure understandings of pupils and their
needs. This appeared to support timely and accurate identification of SEND.
Having positive relationships and high expectations for pupils with SEND
appeared to be important features of practice. Schools also focused on
pupils' strengths to build confidence and independence. Ensuring that pupils
had positive relationships with staff and felt included with peers was also a
feature of some schools' approach. Gaps in understanding of pupils' needs
and starting points resulted in a negative impact on their experiences,
learning and development. In our sample, this particularly seemed to be the
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
3/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
case for children without education, health and care (EHC) plans and those
who were less well known to their special educational needs coordinators
(SENCos).
Pupils with SEND regularly spent time out of class working with
teaching assistants (TAs), but there were some concerns about social
exclusion and over-reliance on a single adult.
Almost all pupils who took part in the research, including those on SEND
support, had TAs allocated to them. Sometimes, this was to support them in
the classroom, but very often they were taken out for intervention activities.
This meant that many pupils were spending some curriculum time with TAs
rather than teachers. This raises concerns about pupils with SEND having
full access to the high-quality teaching that they need in order to have a
chance of success.
Time out of class for intervention activity meant that some pupils were not
able to participate in some learning opportunities and some pupils were
missing entire chunks of the curriculum. Not only does this imply that
regular learning loss will occur in some areas for these pupils, but also that
the curriculum that they are offered does not have the same ambition as for
their peers.
The significant amounts of curriculum time that pupils with SEND are
spending with TAs also raises the issue of support staff training, specifically
in the subject and curriculum knowledge required to teach pupils who have
struggled to learn the intended curriculum at the same rate as their peers.
To deliver intervention activities successfully, TAs need good subject
knowledge. Training for robust subject-specific curriculum knowledge is
therefore an important element of ensuring that the TA role works effectively
for children and young people with SEND.
In a small number of cases, pupils had become over-reliant on their TAs,
potentially impacting on them being able to develop independence. Some
parents and carers also raised some concerns around social exclusion due
to the amount of time spent out of class in small-group or individual
interventions. However, regardless of this, most parents and carers were
generally very positive about the reassurance and facilitation of learning
provided by TAs.
Occasionally, schools were teaching a curriculum to pupils that was
not properly sequenced or well matched to their needs.
Some parents and school staff thought that in a few cases, pupils were
being taught curriculum content that they could not easily access. Due to
missed prior learning or unmet needs, these pupils did not have some of the
required foundational knowledge and skills. In addition, they were not
always given the chance to master basics before moving forwards. When
this occurs, pupils are likely to continue to experience difficulties, gaps in
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
4/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
their understanding will widen and they will then not have the best chance to
succeed in the future. This highlights the importance of practitioners,
including TAs, class teachers and SENCos, having strong subject
knowledge so they can understand how best to develop and teach the
curriculum to support pupils with SEND. It also shows that curriculum
content needs to be prioritised effectively so that pupils with SEND can
master what they most need to know before moving on.
Collaboration between practitioners and families supported schools in
meeting pupils' needs more effectively.
Some schools developed positive and trusting relationships with parents
and carers, treating them as partners in co-production.
[footnote 6]
Parents
shared information about their children with schools, who then used this to
more accurately identify their needs. Some schools used a range of formal
and informal communication channels to encourage families to share
information. Parents and carers in these schools felt well-supported by
individual members of staff, such as the SENCo or a class teacher, and
were more likely to be confident about the school's broader approach to
inclusion.
Mechanisms for co-production with parents and carers were often in
place but implementation was not always meaningful. This is likely to
impact how far schools can tailor provision to children's needs.
While some parents and carers spoke about participating in decision-
making for their child's special educational provision, others felt that they
were not given sufficient information about their child's learning and
development. Some were not given opportunities to input into support plans
by, for example, expressing opinions on targets or provision plans. In some
cases, pupils did not have written support plans at all. This meant that the
graduated approach was not in place and, crucially, that parents and carers
were not given the opportunity to co-produce support plans. A few parents
and carers did not consistently take up opportunities for engagement. These
factors affect how meaningful joint decision-making can be.
School SENCos were essential for mediating provision but
experienced a range of challenges in carrying out their role.
SENCos fulfilled a crucial intermediary role between external agencies,
schools and families. Strong and trusting relationships between SENCos,
parents and carers facilitated this. However, some SENCos felt that they did
not have enough time to carry out their responsibilities and access
continuing professional development.
Some SENCos were doing this alongside a full-time class teacher role. This
indicates that for some schools, the role of the SENCo was not strongly
prioritised. Some SENCos also reported frustration with delays and
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
5/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
bureaucracy with both referrals and EHC plan assessments. These
constrained how effectively they could perform their role.
Schools employed a range of tailored strategies to meet pupils' needs,
sometimes supported by multi-agency services.
Schools made adjustments to support pupils socially and emotionally
helped to enable the pupils to participate in the curriculum. Staff reported
adapting their teaching and providing tailored or specialised resources to
enable pupils to access the curriculum. Subject-specific interventions were
a strong feature. Access to quiet spaces and strong communication at
transition points were also important. When required, specialised support
from multi-agency services footnote 7] complemented what was offered by
schools. This input from multi-agency services was valued by families and
staff. However, some pupils were not receiving help that adequately met
their learning and development needs even when multi-agency services
were involved.
Local authorities had strong ambitions for multi-agency collaboration,
but this did not always translate into improved practice and positive
experiences for schools and families.
Leaders from both local authorities had strategies to promote partnership
working and collaboration between education, health and care services.
However, this did not always happen in practice and many school and
family experiences highlighted challenges such as long waiting times and
high levels of bureaucracy with the EHC plan process. Pupils with SEND
lose too much time in appropriately planned education when there are long
delays in accurately identifying needs.
Some pupils received support from external services, but not always
to the extent they need.
Some families and schools felt that some pupils did not have access to the
full range of practitioners needed, and some did not always have timely
access. In some cases, this led to pupils' targets and support plans being
outdated and their needs unmet. Occasionally, families felt the need to
commission or pay for services themselves to remedy the lack of timely
provision from external services. This highlights the importance of a full
range of multi-agency expertise being present and available for planning
and providing in order to meet pupil needs.
This research raises questions about what 'success' looks like in
terms of supporting children with SEND in mainstream schools.
This report has provided insight into the experiences of individual pupils,
how their needs were identified and the support that was or was not put in
place to allow them to learn and participate in school life. Some of the pupils
in our sample appeared to be thriving at school. They were accessing the
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
6/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
full curriculum alongside their peers, were making progress and were fully
included in the wider life of their schools. Others were accessing a more
limited curriculum or were excluded from particular events and activities.
As some pupils with SEND may need longer to master particular areas of
the curriculum, schools and parents have difficult decisions to make about
how to enable learning while also working to ensure that the pupils are
included in school life. This highlights broader issues for debate about what
'success' looks like in supporting pupils with SEND in mainstream schools.
The variation in support experienced by pupils in this study, even when they
had a similar identified need, suggests that the SEND system relies on
particular individuals performing important roles well and working together
effectively.
This means that 2 pupils with similar needs, attending different schools, can
have very different experiences. Absolute uniformity is unlikely when
individual schools have autonomy to make provision for their pupils.
However, despite individuals working hard and with care, significant
variability in provision is not an indicator of a system working effectively for
children with SEND.
Context for research
Around 1.4 million pupils in English schools have an identified special
educational need
[footnote 8]
The SEND code of practice
[footnote 9
states that
'a child or young person has SEN if they have a learning difficulty or
disability which calls for special educational provision to be made'. For
pupils of compulsory school age, this means that they will have significantly
greater difficulty in learning than the majority of their peers or have a
disability that prevents or hinders them from making use of the facilities
generally provided for their peers in mainstream settings.
[footnote 10]
Four
broad areas of need are identified in the SEND code of practice:
communication and interaction
cognition and learning
social, emotional and mental health difficulties
sensory and/or physical needs
[footnote 11]
Many children and young people who have SEND may have a disability
under the Equality Act 2010. This states that a person has a disability if they
have 'a physical or mental impairment that has a "substantial" and "long-
term" negative effect' on their ability to carry out normal daily activities.
[footnote
12]
For these pupils, 'reasonable adjustments
[footnote 13]
must be
made to ensure that they are not at a substantial disadvantage.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
7/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
Despite these official definitions, research highlights the varying
interpretations and practices across professionals, schools and local
authorities for identifying SEND.
[footnote 14]
The code of practice also sets out a 'graduated approach' to removing
barriers and supporting pupils' learning with special provision. This is
designed to be a responsive, spiral system of regular and personalised
assessment, targeted action and review. The code of practice also requires
each local authority to publish its own 'local offer', describing the support
and provision available for children and young people with an identified
SEN. This means that how provision is planned and achieved is dependent
on the approach of the local authority and therefore what it means to have
pupils' needs met in mainstream environments varies.
During the assessment and identification process, many children and young
people are given labels that describe and encapsulate their characteristics
and behaviour. Research highlights the fact that diagnoses and labels link
the SEND system's resources to individual pupils,
[footnote 15]
enabling
access to improved opportunities through individualised programmes of
support designed to meet needs. In addition, the shared terminology of a
label offers a helpful way for practitioners to communicate what a child's
strengths and needs might be.
However, the research also suggests that a label of SEN can be a burden
for children, diminishing self-esteem. In addition, labels may be used
inaccurately, and blanket application may mask individual differences
between children, preventing them from being understood in the way that is
unique to them. Labels can also potentially undermine the ambition to
provide high-quality educational provision and reduce expectations for
potential progress. Labelling encompasses a wide-ranging and complex
debate but, ultimately, the identification of need and any assigned label
should make a positive difference for individual pupils.
footnote 16]
The number of children and young people identified as having SEN has
increased for the fourth consecutive year, from 14.4% of all pupils in
January 2016 to 15.5% in January 2020.
footnote 17]
The Department for
Education's statistics for SEN show that many of these pupils (almost 82%)
are placed in mainstream primary and secondary schools.
footnote 18]
Most of
the identified pupils are classed as requiring 'SEN support', typically
provided by schools. However, those with more significant or complex
needs should have a multi-agency statutory assessment and hold an EHC
plan.
An EHC plan is a legal document that details the support a pupil or young
person requires and stipulates what the local authority must provide to help
them succeed. EHC plans were introduced through the Children and
Families Act 2014, [footnote 19] which built on recommendations from the
Lamb Inquiry.
[footnote 20]
The Act preceded a number of reforms
[footnote 21]
to
ensure that pupils' needs could be identified in a timely fashion and to allow
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
8/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
pupils, young people and their families to be more involved in the discussion
and decision-making about the help and support they need.
[footnote 22]
The number of pupils with an EHC plan (or statement of special educational
needs
[footnote 23]
before 2014) has steadily increased each year for a
decade,
[footnote 24]
rising to 3.3% of the pupil population currently.
[footnote 25]
Data from the school census published in January 2020 details the number
of pupils with SEND in different school types. This shows that almost half of
pupils with EHC plans are educated in mainstream primary and secondary
schools.
[footnote 26]
In addition, 68% of all new EHC plans finalised for the
first time in 2019 were for children and young people in mainstream
schools.
[footnote 27]
It is clear that teaching pupils who have an identified SEND is likely to be a
feature of most mainstream teachers' daily practice. Understanding how to
effectively meet the needs of these pupils is therefore a vital element of
high-quality education. This is particularly important given that pupils with
SEND have poorer outcomes than other pupils, [footnote 28] which can lead to
some restrictions in subject choice at secondary school stage.
[footnote 29]
A decade on from the publication of the Lamb Inquiry's findings, the 2019
House of Commons Education Select Committee report found that many of
the concerns it had raised still remained.
[footnote 30]
The report stated that:
there was a lack of accountability, particularly for the bodies responsible
for delivering health and social care support to families
there were serious gaps in external provision and training
[footnote 31]
parents, children and young people were often not meaningfully involved
in decision-making and reviews
The report highlighted a range of important issues that influence the way in-
school support, therapies and other multi-agency services for children and
young people with SEND are provided.
SEND provision is a major concern for Ofsted. We inspect it:
through area SEND inspections, which look at the provision that children
and young people with and without EHC plans receive from education,
health and social care providers
as part of inspections carried out under the education inspection
framework (EIF), where investigations into the curriculum and behaviour
management policies and practices include an examination of how well
the needs of pupils with SEND are identified, assessed and met
through our framework for inspecting local authority children's services
(ILACS)
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
9/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
In addition to the findings detailed by the House of Commons Education
Select Committee (2019), both the National Audit Office
[footnote 32]
and
Ofsted have also underlined areas of strength and weakness of the SEND
system in England and variations in provision across the country. Ofsted's
recent annual report highlighted the fact that in the most successful local
areas, parents and carers had been given meaningful involvement in
planning and decision-making, for example through parent-carer forums.
However, the report also pointed to a lack of coordination between
education and health services that resulted in delays in assessing and
meeting children and young people's needs. [footnote 33] These findings built
on a previous report that highlighted the fact that identification of complex
SEND was generally successful in the early years. It also highlighted that
strong leadership and joint working was evidenced in some local areas but
that there were concerns about a poor focus on outcomes for pupils with
SEND and difficulties for families accessing services, and that effective
practices for co-production with parents and pupils had not been
established in some local authorities.
[footnote 34]
Given the many challenges that these findings present, understanding the
features of effective current models of SEND practice is important as Ofsted
and Care Quality Commission (CQC) local area inspections continue. In
addition, Ofsted has recently reported concerns about fractures in some
elements of the SEND system. We have found that some leaders do not
have deep enough insight into the experience of children and young people
with SEND to commission services effectively.
[footnote 35]
In response to all of these challenges, we developed the following research
questions for this study:
1. How are the needs of children and young people met in mainstream
schools?
2. To what extent does the approach schools take to identifying, assessing
and meeting these needs vary between providers?
Since we started this piece of research, the Department for Education has
announced a cross-government review into SEND provision to understand
how to ensure that the 2014 reforms are fully delivered.
Methodology
Based on the questions above, our aim was to understand the experiences
of children and young people with SEND in mainstream schools. New
understandings developed through this research will inform what we do on
inspection and the framework for area SEND inspections.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
10/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
A qualitative, case study research design was used. We explored, in depth,
the experiences of 21 pupils from 7 different mainstream primary and
secondary schools (see appendix 1 and appendix 2 for a more detailed
explanation of the methodology).
Interviews were carried out with the pupils, [footnote 36] their parents or carers
and their teachers and support staff. We also interviewed the school
headteachers and SENCos. To develop rich understandings of the local
context of the areas visited and the strategic oversight for SEND, we also
held group interviews with representatives from the 2 local authorities and
clinical commissioning groups (CCGs).
Table 1 below details the identified SEND of the pupils who took part in the
study and the level of support they receive. The language used to describe
each pupil's SEND has been taken from the parents, carers and school staff
who participated in the research. All names are pseudonyms.
Table 1: Characteristics of the case study pupils
See appendix 3 for pen portraits of the case study pupils.
School and
Pupil
SEND (as described by
Support level
local
research participants)
authority
School 1,
Ethan
Autism
EHC plan
primary, local
authority 1
School 1,
Ava
Listening and attention,
School SEND
primary, local
dietary
support
authority 1
School 1,
Jackson
Lung disease
School SEND
primary, local
support
authority 1
School 2,
Matthew
Behavioural, social,
EHC plan
primary, local
emotional and mental
authority 1
health
School 2,
lan
Behavioural and sensory
School SEND
primary, local
processing
support
authority 1
School 2,
Amelia
Cancer
School SEND
primary, local
support
authority 1
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
11/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
School and
Pupil
SEND (as described by
Support level
local
research participants)
authority
School 3,
Jordan
Cerebral palsy
EHC plan
primary, local
authority 1
School 3,
Ryan
Sensory processing
School SEND
primary, local
support
authority 1
School 3,
Nathan
Social, emotional and
School SEND
primary, local
mental health
support
authority 1
School 4,
Matteo
Autism and attention
EHC plan
primary, local
deficit hyperactivity
authority 2
disorder, dietary
School 4,
Jakob
Behavioural
School SEND
primary, local
support
authority 2
School 4,
Aaron
Speech and language
School SEND
primary, local
support
authority 2
School 5,
Thomas
Autism
EHC plan
primary, local
authority 2
School 5,
Connor
Sensory processing,
School SEND
primary, local
dietary
support
authority 2
School 5,
Harper
Academic progress
School SEND
primary, local
support
authority 2
School 6,
Robert
Academic progress in
EHC plan
secondary,
mathematics, writing,
local authority
reading and
2
comprehension
School 6,
Maria
Hearing, reading
School SEND
secondary,
comprehension,
support
cognition
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
12/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
School and
Pupil
SEND (as described by
Support level
local
research participants)
authority
local authority
2
School 6,
Faizan
Hearing
School SEND
secondary,
support
local authority
2
School 7,
Isaac
Genetic syndrome which
EHC plan
secondary,
affects behaviour,
local authority
cognition and
2
development
School 7,
Cameron
Speech and language,
EHC plan
secondary,
dyspraxia, hypermobility,
application denied;
local authority
information processing
exceptional
2
funding allocated
School 7,
Madison
Social, emotional and
School SEND
secondary,
mental health,
support
local authority
information processing
2
Limitations
The findings of this report are about a small number of pupils with SEND. As
such, they are not generalisable to the wider population of those with
SEND.
The aim of this research was to build on our understanding of pupils'
experiences. Although the sample is small, we can still develop hypotheses
about the factors that may influence the experiences of pupils with SEND
who are educated within mainstream schools.
The pupils were selected by their schools. We asked schools to select
pupils who would not find it difficult to discuss their lives with unfamiliar
adults as well as being dissimilar to one another in terms of characteristics
like gender, age and their types of need. Making this methodological
decision may have limited the breadth of the sample. It should also be noted
that the data collected from the pupils was less rich than that gathered from
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
13/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
adult participants (see appendix 1 and appendix 2 for a more detailed
explanation of the methodology).
There was limited evidence of social care input for the 2 pupils who were in
care at the time of the study. However, it should be noted that this relates to
a very small number of respondents and that social care professionals
working with these children and young people were not included in this
research.
It is important to recognise that this research was carried out early in the
spring term of 2019/20, with fieldwork completed before the COVID-19
pandemic resulted in schools being closed to most pupils.
Report structure
This report presents findings from our research. Each section explores a
different facet of the experiences of pupils with SEND and the provision
offered by their mainstream schools. Broadly, these cover pupils' school-led
support, home-school relationships and multi-agency involvement. The
conclusion considers the findings in relation to the research questions and
any implications for future inspection practice.
Pupil-centred school support
Introduction
Schools described using strategies that are part of a pupil-centred approach
to education in which the staff intended to understand the strengths and
needs of the pupil and make tailored adaptations to the whole curriculum.
This helped several schools to include pupils, enabling them to participate in
the varied aspects of mainstream school life alongside their peers. Previous
research has found that this kind of inclusion helps achieve a positive
school experience for all pupils.
[footnote 37]
Schools differed in the ways in which they worked to ensure that pupils
could be included in classroom learning and social activities. This section
addresses the first research question by examining how schools facilitated
learning, with a focus on the extent to which pupils are included. We explore
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
14/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
the pupils' day-to-day experiences of school provision, focusing on 3 main
aspects of professional practice:
understanding the pupil
having high expectations for pupils with SEND
providing tailored support
In addition, we explore some challenges for inclusive practice that help to
address the second research question.
Understanding the pupil
In accordance with previous research that suggests that school staff should
develop their understanding of each pupil with SEND to promote inclusion,
all the schools that took part in this research described building strong
relationships with pupils. They did this in order to understand the pupils'
unique strengths and needs, help tailor support and provide interventions.
This understanding was often bolstered by SEND-focused training and
opportunities for continuing professional development for staff.
For example, the importance of developing a deep understanding of Isaac's
behavioural needs was referred to by his teacher and TA. They said that this
had enabled them to defuse outbursts with reasoned, calm discussion.
When talking about what made her feel included, Madison said that she had
a positive relationship with staff and was able to rely on them:
"
if I need help, I just tell them [the teachers] that I need help and then
they help me."
Madison school 7, secondary, local authority 2
Parents said strong and positive staff-pupil relationships were an important
element of an inclusive approach. For example, Faizan's parent said:
"I know he's able to speak to the teachers himself about any issues he
faces... they've been really good with him."
Faizan's parent, school 6, secondary, local authority 2
Cameron's parent also highlighted the valuable relationship that had
developed between Cameron and the school. When staff explained their
approach to working with Cameron, they described focusing on his
academic learning to help him become confident and relaxed but also on
building relationships. The SENCo commented on this:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
15/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
"
he [Cameron] knows that he's supported by all. I mean [...] the things
that he jokes about and he's telling the teaching assistants on a daily
basis, he obviously does have a really good relationship with them."
SENCo, school 7, secondary, local authority 2
Staff appeared to have built a strong connection with Cameron. They knew
and understood his needs and strengths, partly through daily informal
coaching sessions. They proudly described a breakthrough lesson where
Cameron read his own poem aloud and allowed himself to be recorded.
They felt that the focus on relationships had paid off:
"
it's lovely to see him having got to this development stage isn't it now,
it's great to have him come in and have a chat in the morning."
Cameron's form tutor, school 7 secondary, local authority 2
A few parents and carers also told us that empathy was important. For
example, with regards to his mental health, Nathan's parents said:
" he didn't need somebody to say you'll be OK, you'll be OK. They
knew his fear was real and they took the time to make him feel
reassured, so he could carry on with their tasks in school."
Nathan's parent, school 3, primary, local authority 1
When schools focused on building positive relationships to understand a
pupil's strengths and what they could achieve, there appeared to be a
positive impact on pupil progress. For example, Matthew's foster parents
recalled how his previous primary school had reported disruptive and
sometimes combative behaviour and that Matthew found it difficult to
concentrate on learning. At times, he was sent to a separate room or sent
home, eventually being excluded. Matthew's headteacher recalled receiving
reports from his previous school about his behaviour and was told, 'you
won't be able to do anything with him'.
On Matthew's arrival at the school, staff focused on being positive, helping
Matthew feel safe and building trusting relationships with others. The school
allocated a learning mentor and provided play therapy to help Matthew
regulate his emotions, as well as one-to-one intervention to help him catch
up on missed learning. This had helped Matthew to adjust to his new
school. His headteacher reported, 'He smiles now. He didn't smile when he
arrived.' His foster parents also noted the positive change.
Research has highlighted the importance of social inclusion for pupils with
SEND. [footnote 38] Some schools' understanding of individual pupil needs
allowed them to promote social inclusion. For example, Matthew's teacher
recognised that he had needed his own personalised reward system before
he could progress to the system used by the rest of his class. This meant he
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
16/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
was then treated the same as his peers and included more fully in his
classroom. The TA remarked, 'he was quite happy to do that as well. It was
[the] right package choice to go ahead with that'.
Similarly, lan's teacher and SENCo provided structured activities to help him
develop positive relationships with his peers. For example, the learning
mentor recognised lan's interests and helped him bond with other pupils
over a shared hobby.
In another example, Amelia's teacher and TA provided discrete help that did
not mark her out as being different from her peers:
"
there's someone in the background should she require that support,
and I think they've done that amazingly but that's not noticeable and
that's what I wanted really because I don't want her to be singled out or
stand out."
Amelia's parent, school 2, primary, local authority 1
School staff also mentioned that Amelia took part in play-based activities
and challenges in groups, so she did not 'feel like the only one that needs
help'. In this way, Amelia could feel included with her peers while still
receiving the support that she needed. In all these instances, staff used
their understanding of the pupils to ensure that provision was as inclusive
as possible.
Gaps in understanding
One of the barriers to including pupils holistically in school life was gaps in
understanding of pupils' strengths and needs. For example, Harper's
teacher spoke of trying to tailor tasks in order to encourage and maintain
greater interest in curriculum goals and maintain progress with reading.
However, they were also unsure of whether or not he had passed the
phonics screening check and, when asked to describe his SEND, they
identified it as his 'ability in class', indicating some uncertainty around his
needs. Similarly, Connor's teacher could not recall his specific needs.
Ava's parent suggested that she could not keep friends for very long and
Ava herself mentioned that her peers 'play without me' and that sometimes,
if they annoyed her, she '[beat] them up'. In contrast, Ava's teacher and
class TA felt she got on well with her peers. They had therefore not
implemented any strategies to help her to form friendships. In this case, not
developing a deep understanding of the pupil potentially had an impact on
Ava's experiences of social inclusion.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
17/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
Similarly, staff at Aaron's school, although aware he had difficulties with
verbal communication,
[footnote 39]
were unclear on the extent of his needs,
saying he could communicate with family and peers. However, Aaron's
mother mentioned that sometimes he found communicating at home difficult
and instead used actions to convey his meaning to her. It appeared that this
signing system was not used in school. In Aaron's case, the school's
understanding of his needs was apparently limited.
Sometimes, staff faced challenges in developing their understanding of
pupils with SEND and this influenced the accurate and timely identification
of needs. These challenges related to staff knowledge and pupils adopting
coping strategies that masked the difficulties they were experiencing.
Staff knowledge
Several primary schools reported that they had only identified needs once
the pupil had reached upper key stage 1 or the start of key stage 2, rather
than when the needs initially emerged. The SENCo for school 1 talked
about this being a long-standing trend, with pupils' needs not identified until
later in their primary school education. This SENCo had consequently
carried out specific work with early years foundation stage (EYFS) staff to
promote early identification.
There may be a range of reasons why identification is not timely. Some
needs can be complex, making it challenging for schools to understand and
identify. For example, although Maria's parent and the school had worked
together and identified a general area of need, staff did not have a clear or
consistent understanding of her needs. Maria's TA and form tutor felt her
main barriers to learning were comprehension, writing and cognition. The
SENCo defined her need as a working memory difficulty. In contrast, the
headteacher felt her needs were attention-based. In this case, multi-
professional involvement would likely have facilitated accurate identification,
but it is also important to consider the importance of school professionals
sharing their insights with each other to build a strong common
understanding.
Pupils who were receiving SEND support but did not have an EHC plan
were less likely to have their needs identified accurately. This may be
because pupils with an EHC plan have a multi-professional assessment of
need, while those without EHC plans typically have their needs identified
and assessed at school-level.
For some pupils, this meant that staff did not always seem certain of the
nature of their SEND, possibly due to a lack of specialist SEND knowledge.
For example, Jackson's class teacher and SENCo talked about the
challenges in identifying his needs, describing how he 'was always one of
those pupils who was on the borderline. He made progress, but it was never
enough progress'. It was only when the SENCo started teaching Jackson
directly in Year 2 that his level of need was fully recognised. In the case of
Aaron, when describing his needs and what was in place to help him learn
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
18/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
and develop, the class teacher reported feeling that it was 'out of our skills
set to be able to teach him'.
These examples suggest a need for continuing professional development
for SEND and greater access to staff or practitioners with specialist SEND
expertise.
Pupils' coping strategies
We also saw examples of pupils adopting coping strategies that could
potentially mask needs, making clear and timely identification harder.
For example, Faizan had developed strategies to cope with his hearing
problem. In describing his difficulties and needs, Faizan's parent did
mention that he had received some speech therapy in another country
during pre-school due to 'delayed speech', but said he was 'was fine after
that'. Subsequent teachers did not pick anything up until Faizan reached
Year 6, when his teacher identified potential hearing difficulties because he
appeared to struggle when there was a lot of noise in the classroom.
Faizan's parents then took him to a doctor, who felt the issue was not with
his hearing but related to blocked nasal cavities. Following treatment for
this, his parent said they still felt there was 'something more as well'. His
hearing needs were finally identified by an audiologist, but Faizan did not
receive speech and language therapy until secondary school. Faizan's
mother mentioned that were some delays with referrals during the transition
period from secondary to primary and the SENCo reported that speech and
language therapy began in Year 8.
The parent reported that the speech and language therapist had noticed
that Faizan could lip-read. It is therefore possible that Faizan's need was
not identified earlier because of this self-taught strategy. Additionally, his
positive behaviour and attitude to learning likely made his need less
apparent:
"Faizan, he was late identification with his hearing difficulties and I don't
know if he became more apparent because - very late actually - it was
Year 8 Faizan is just one of those dedicated students who applies
himself, and I shouldn't say this but you could sit back and do nothing
for Faizan and he would still succeed because that is his attitude to
learning."
SENCo, school 6, secondary, local authority 2
Because Faizan developed strategies to cope well with school life and
learning, there were missed opportunities to identify his needs. These were
perhaps in part due to a lack of efficient information-sharing between
education, health and care professionals but also perhaps because of
potential weaknesses with staff knowledge, leading to hearing difficulties not
being noticed until the end of primary school. One impact of late
identification and assessment was that Faizan was doing additional
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
19/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
vocabulary work with a sensory support worker footnote 40] in preparation for
his GCSEs.
After identifying 'quite mild needs' with lan, the school provided play therapy
in Year 1. According to staff, lan made good progress so the school agreed
with lan's parents that play therapy would stop in Year 2. As he progressed
towards Year 4, at times, lan began to have frustrated outbursts. lan's
parent referred to writing as a potential 'trigger'. Working closely with
parents, school staff developed a range of strategies to support lan with
writing tasks across the curriculum but also in regulating his emotions,
forming stronger peer relationships and building self-esteem. They reported
that he was now making progress. lan's parent referred to the identification
process:
"
they missed they believe they picked up on lan in Year 1 and they
said that they thought lan had some additional needs. But they said he,
within sort of a few months he adjusted a lot better. Within 6 months
they thought it was fine. They said he fell off the radar because,
[SENCo]s sort of theory is that maybe his home life was managed and
controlled quite well, he has good support around him and it didn't get
picked up until Year 4 again."
lan's parent, school 2, primary, local authority 1
It is possible that initial improvements in lan's behaviour occurred because
he developed strategies through play therapy and at home to regulate
emotions. This may have meant that staff missed signs of continuing need
for support and his learning needs manifested differently as he progressed
through the school.
Having high expectations for pupils with SEND
In addition to developing full understanding of the pupil, having high
expectations for pupils with SEND was an important aspect of inclusive
practice for members of school staff. For example, some school staff
described how they focused on a pupil's strengths to build confidence, while
also setting expectations and specific targets for pupils to work towards.
Some parents and staff also spoke more generally about the importance of
having strong aspirations for pupils with SEND:
"
we tried to identify strengths so that we could really build on his
strengths. So he didn't see himself as a pupil with difficulties What I
expected him to do was very clear. One of his targets is be ready, which
means get your resources out. Listen. And complete tasks. Does he
always do that? No. Is that the intention and are we improving on it?
Yes."
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
20/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
Nathan's teacher, school 3, primary, local authority 1
"Just because he's got a need and he's been diagnosed with ASD footnote
41]
It doesn't hold us back."
Ethan's teacher, school 1, primary, local authority 1
In some schools, aspirations for pupils with SEND included focusing on their
strengths to build on expectations for behaviour and learning. For example,
Jakob's teachers aimed to add 3 positives in his home-school book every
day to emphasise his progress rather than only mention his behaviour.
Alongside this, they spent time modelling their expectations through
repetition. His teacher felt that, as a result, Jakob was now 'aware of
expectations which is a big step forward'. Some parents and carers liked the
fact that their children's schools focused on strengths and positives in this
way. They felt that this encouraged their child to achieve more stretching
academic targets:
"
he's just a good kid and he really tries, and he wants to achieve and I
think that's why they've been brilliant because they've just seen that in
him and they've pushed to help him."
Cameron's parent, school 7, secondary, local authority 2
In a few instances, pupils appeared to be reticent about the aspirations their
schools had for them. For example, although Ethan's parents were satisfied
with the school's planning and inclusion (staff even assigned a role in the
school play to the parent in order to make Ethan feel comfortable), his
teachers found it difficult to include him. His parent reported that he liked to
'take himself away' and that 'it's Ethan himself that doesn't want to be
included'. His TA also echoed this: 'he's actually included by the teacher, by
everything, but it's what he will let himself be included in'. In this instance,
the aspiration for Ethan to be a full participant in school life was constrained
but remained part of a strong vision for what staff wanted him to achieve in
the future.
Developing pupil independence
Some schools also described aspirations to develop the independence of
their pupils with SEND. Many schools worked towards this through the
flexible use of TAs, as part of a broader strategy to promote inclusion and
build the confidence and skills of pupils with SEND. lan's teacher and TA
talked about how he took part in all class learning but received additional
one-to-one help with writing, particularly spelling, which could cause him
intense frustration and sometimes led to angry and disruptive outbursts.
They talked about giving him praise and constant reassurance to build
confidence, and they had also provided him with a mood board to help him
express how he was feeling. This helped staff to know when to prompt him
to use agreed strategies to self-regulate his emotions.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
21/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
Other pupils, such as Madison, also received targeted subject TA help with
work tasks, which she really valued. She explained that the TA helped her to
understand a concept or find other ways of solving a problem in
mathematics: she helps find me another way of [...] doing something if I
don't get it.' When describing working with Madison, the TA referred to
providing a model for approaching problem solving tasks and encouraging
her to work with peers:
"I will move away, and I just keep going back to her she knows where I
am [...] and she'll put her hand up."
Madison's TA, school 7, local authority 2
In this way, the TA could provide Madison with reassurance but was also
aiming to encourage greater independence. However, this example raises
the issue of support staff subject knowledge and curriculum training. Robust
knowledge of the curriculum is necessary for all school practitioners around
a child - TAs, teachers and the SENCo - in order for them to understand
and work within the teacher's plan for progression when supporting pupils'
knowledge development.
Cameron's support from the TA was adapted over time to reflect his needs.
For example, initially, the TA working with Cameron used thumb signals to
enable him to communicate his feelings about his work as Cameron was
uncomfortable with speaking. However, over time, Cameron started to
'come out of himself' and began to speak with school staff. The focus then
moved to learning strategies: for example, how to manage his feelings when
he was not successful with tasks and how to be resilient, move forward with
problems and improve. Cameron's parent mentioned that his learning and
confidence had improved and that he had 'turned around' since starting at
the school, 'because she's [the TA] now there, she can help him along the
way'.
Matthew's TA provision also shifted over time to support growing
independence. Staff reported that when he first joined the school, 'he was
struggling to do any academic work at all'. The TA recalled having to work
individually with him outside of the classroom, break content down into
small chunks and provide learning breaks. This was adapted over time as
Matthew became more confident and able to engage with the curriculum.
This meant that intervention could be provided in a more inclusive way. His
headteacher reported that the progress he made had led to him being
'reintegrated' back into his class.
For a few pupils, there were signs that they were becoming over-reliant on
TA support, an issue explored in greater depth in a later section of this
report. Ryan's class teacher described how he would 'just sit and wait for an
adult to come and do things for him'. The teacher reported that for writing
tasks, Ryan sometimes used a whiteboard to create sentences that an adult
would check before he recorded them in his book. However, Ryan did not
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
22/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
always need to use this strategy. The teacher described how they had
started to take a more hands-off yet encouraging approach to curriculum
activities with him:
"The approach we've had... is that we're here if you need us but we're
not first and foremost going to jump in and do it for you."
Ryan's teacher, school 3, primary, local authority 1
Instead, staff talked about monitoring his progress to decide where and
when more specific help was appropriate. Staff felt Ryan had responded
well to this approach and appeared more independent and confident:
" [he has] realised now, that he can write. I think he probably had a
block on himself and obviously his emotional issues have impacted on
his learning. And so I think now he realises that things are attainable. He
can do them."
Ryan's teacher, school 3, primary, local authority 1
In the examples above, staff shared aspirations and expectations for pupils'
independence [footnote 42] and worked to support this as part of their
approach. However, for other pupils, although staff had an intent to help
pupils become more independent, their implementation of this ambition was
unclear. For example, staff at Harper's school agreed that he needed more
help to improve his independence but did not know how this would be
achieved. Both Maria's TA and staff at Jackson's school were concerned
that the pupils were losing confidence but did not describe specific or
individualised strategies to help prevent this.
Providing tailored support
Schools provided tailored support to help pupils access the curriculum and
wider school life, including for transition. These elements are explored in the
following section, alongside some attendant challenges for inclusive
practice.
Accessing the curriculum
As part of their approach to including pupils with SEND, schools enabled
the pupils to access the curriculum in a range of ways - through adapted
lesson activities, additional resources and in-class TA support. In particular,
schools seemed to consider interventions to be a useful tool for supporting
access to the intended curriculum and they were frequently used for pupils
with SEND. Many of the pupils received intervention sessions in core areas
such as phonics, mathematics and reading. Some of the secondary-aged
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
23/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
pupils received additional mathematics or English sessions from external
subject specialists.
Adaptation and resourcing for inclusion
Staff reported using a range of adaptations to teach the planned curriculum
for pupils with SEND: for example, writing frames, chunking material,
questioning and adaptation of resources:
Ethan's teacher helped him engage with the planned curriculum content
by using his interests as a context for learning, for example trains or
fictional characters
Jackson's teachers created a personalised dictionary for him to refer to
and help him recall vocabulary and spelling during writing tasks
for Isaac, who was working on entry level qualifications in a range of
subjects, the school supported him to access this complementary
curriculum alongside his classmates who were working towards GCSEs
Most of the pupils and their families were happy with these approaches.
When describing elements of their provision, many pupils often referred to
the resources provided.
[footnote 43]
Teachers reported using physical and
visual materials for their pupils with SEND. For example, lan had a
personalised work chart, while Isaac's teachers adapted the size and
resolution of all of his resources on account of his sensory needs. To
manage Ethan's anxiety at classroom transition points, teachers used
timers for activities, visual timetables and 'now and next' charts. Because
Harper struggled to apply sounds to his writing and form letters correctly, he
was provided with a sound map. Other pupils were provided with sensory
breaks, ear defenders or other adjustments, such as Faizan sitting near the
front of the class to accommodate his hearing needs. These examples
illustrate a range of basic legally protected reasonable adjustments
[footnote
44]
made by staff as part of their standard practice.
Curriculum support from Tas
The deployment of a TA is a useful, frequently used strategy to support
children with SEND. [footnote 45] TAs are a flexible resource who can be
deployed in a range of ways - to support pupils within class, through the
delivery of small group or individual intervention activity, or through direct
support to the teacher.
[footnote 46]
The benefits of TA deployment for pupils'
confidence and motivation have been highlighted,
[footnote 47]
as have
significant concerns about reliance on TAs. A landmark study found a
negative relationship between the amount of TA support received and the
progress made by pupils in mainstream schools.
[footnote 48]
These results
were explained by the way TAs were deployed and prepared, factors that
are outside their control. A follow-up study exploring the teaching and
support of pupils with SEN highlighted the high degree of separation and TA
support they experienced. [footnote 49] It also found that, compared with their
peers, pupils with SEN received less appropriate and lower quality
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
24/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
pedagogical provision. In addition, TAs often had more responsibility than
teachers for pupils with SEN and insufficient opportunities to prepare with
the teacher. A recent report has also pointed out that TAs are often put in
positions that demand much more than a supplementary role and that this
can lead to lower quality learning.
[footnote 50]
Based on this evidence, it is
clear that the appropriate deployment of TAs requires careful consideration
in order that resources are used effectively.
All but one of the pupils received interventions or task-based input from a TA
in some or all areas of the curriculum. Some pupils were allocated a one-to-
one TA. Planned out-of-class intervention for core areas such as
mathematics, reading and phonics was almost always provided by TAs. TAs
were also deployed less directly to pupils, using differentiated class-based
group work. This meant that some pupils received class-based TA input,
alongside some one-to-one intervention. For example, Jackson received
one-to-one intervention in mathematics and also intervention group work for
spelling. Isaac was the only pupil in this group to have a one-to-one TA at all
times of the school day, including during breaktimes.
It is clear that many pupils within our sample were spending large amounts
of time with TAs, and therefore away from the attention of qualified teachers.
This raises 2 significant issues. Interventions are only useful if intended
curriculum goals are clear. Therefore, strong collaboration between
teachers and TAs is vital to ensure clarity of learning intention for pupils. In
addition, it is vital that TAs who supervise the learning of children and young
people with SEND have the requisite subject and curriculum knowledge to
support these pupils who need the best teaching
footnote 51]
or the close
supervision of someone who does. One headteacher highlighted related
concerns over the deployment of TAs and underlined the central importance
of teachers retaining clear oversight of and responsibility for the learning of
pupils with SEND in their classroom:
"I also want our teaching staff to be a bit more proactive with the children
and instead of the TA being in the room so that's kind of the TA's
responsibility. Staff know that it's quality first teaching, and they are
responsible for those children. They recognise that, but the actual action
isn't necessarily always there I want the teacher to be able to pass on
that subject knowledge. Because they are the person that's in charge of
that subject knowledge."
Headteacher, school 6, secondary, local authority 2
As part of their roles, most TAs had received SEND training through INSET
days. A smaller number had also been given the opportunity to complete
training or courses for specific needs, such as autism or speech and
language. However, TAs have not had initial teacher training or the ongoing
professional development opportunities that include understanding the
components for teaching a curriculum, subject-specific knowledge and how
to ensure that learning is remembered so that interventions in areas such as
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
25/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
mathematics, speech and phonics is effective. Training for special needs is
an important element of ensuring effective TA support but subject-specific
training to facilitate pupils' learning of curriculum content should also be
crucial for support staff.
Wider support from TAs
Within the participating schools, in addition to curriculum interventions and
classwork input, TAs were frequently allocated to pupils for a range of other
activities. For example, Matteo received some time to work through a
physical and sensory exercise circuit that had been devised by an
occupational therapist. Jordan's TA carried out physiotherapy exercises with
him during physical education (PE) and provided practical help with his
wheelchair. Amelia received allocated TA hours for work on concentration,
some aspects of personal care and developing gross motor skills in PE.
Jakob's TA modelled turn-taking and participating in activities using timers.
This had led to Jakob beginning to take part in small group phonics work
and carpet sessions.
Some pupils had different TAs working with them at different times. For
example, Matteo had 2 TAs allocated for his morning activities, while a
range of adults were deployed in a relay-style approach to stay with Jakob
throughout the day. His teacher reported that Jakob had difficulties
regulating his attention and his emotions with adults and peers and that his
significant needs required a very intensive approach. The school had found
that support from a small team of TAs was beneficial, with everyone being
less overwhelmed.
Parents and carers referred to the strong relationships between pupils and
TAs as being beneficial for their pupils. Madison's parent spoke very highly
of the consistent encouragement provided by TAs who were 'always there to
help her'. In fact, Madison's teacher described her TA support as an
important 'prop'. Thomas's parent referred to the EHC plan and its role
being 'to keep his one to one and I can't imagine how we would be if we
didn't have someone'. When parents and carers referred to TAs, they often
showed appreciation for the social emotional support they provided. Their
responses did not focus on the effectiveness or quality of education.
Environmental support
Staff and pupils referred to environmental strategies that could be used
inclusively. The pupils who were asked knew about quiet spaces provided
by the school. Isaac talked about the room in his school helping him to feel
relaxed. lan's teacher encouraged the use of the book corner tent as 'his
quiet space where he can just calm down'. Ryan and Ava were also able to
independently access a quiet space when they needed it. Ryan appreciated
the fact that the school has provided 'lots of places where there's not many
people - so you can calm down really easily'. Some of the pupils reported
not needing these kinds of spaces.
Transition points
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
26/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
Some school staff spoke about the need to provide smooth transitions for
pupils with SEND at certain points in their education. This was particularly
important for key stage 2 pupils whose move to secondary school was
upcoming. School staff talked about the processes they used to try and
make sure that pupils and their families were ready for this, using practices
such as parent visits to begin the transition process earlier in the school
year:
"I tend to have a phone conversation with any of our pupils who were
moving up who might have specific needs, as in Jordan's needs,
physical needs. I would be speaking to the SENCo anyway and saying
what would your normal practice [be] and what we've done historically is
they've come in and had a meeting with parents to allay any worries
anyway, before we've even started."
SENCo, school 3, primary, local authority 1
Although most parents and carers felt involved in their child's transition,
many were still anxious. This was the case even where they felt informed
and had a good relationship with their child's school. Their anxiety was even
greater when they felt uninformed:
"So, what I'm really scared about at the moment, is that he's in Year 4
now and I'm thinking about Year 6, I'm thinking about high school. And
I'm going to have to start thinking where is he, what's going to be
appropriate for him? I've got no support in that."
Matteo's parent, school 4, primary, local authority 2
It should be noted that some school staff were also anxious about primary-
secondary transition:
"
making it clear I am concerned about Matthew going to high school
obviously because although he is doing so well in our school, high
schools are just a completely different environment and a completely
different set of rules aren't they?"
SENCo, school 2, primary, local authority 1
Interestingly, the pupils did not appear to share the same concerns about
moving to new environments. However, the experiences of participants do
highlight the importance of collaborative working between parents and
schools.
Collaboration between schools was also important. The 2 secondary
schools in our sample discussed using information from primary schools to
inform pupil transition, including speaking with primary staff and parents or
carers. In both secondary schools, this information was brought together
using pupil passports:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
27/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
"
as soon as we know which students will be coming to join us we start
collecting information I do then go out and visit their SENCos or the
class teacher and we go through student by student, sometimes
parents and we get a lot of our information."
SENCo, school 6, secondary, local authority 2
"
we get given the passports and get told which students are coming
into Year 7 for the taster day when they are in Year 6."
Madison's TA, school 7, secondary, local authority 2
The 2 secondary schools also talked about working with parents and carers
to identify future post-16 pathways. This included going to college or
working towards alternative qualifications. Parents and carers with pupils
attending secondaries suggested that this approach had led to a positive
working relationship with the schools.
Sometimes, a pupil's needs were not communicated effectively between
education phases due to a lack of collaborative working. This mainly
concerned the primary to secondary transition, but also early years to
primary:
"When I went to the nursery, it was evident that Jakob had issues, but the
nursery didn't tell me how severe the issues were so when he came we
weren't ready for him. [...] a big thing, one of my bugbears, especially in
reception is pupils coming from nursery and we don't know what we're
getting until they come, despite me going to visit."
SENCo, school 4, primary, local authority 2
This lack of information-sharing led to some parents and receiving schools
having to complete extra work to fill gaps or repeat processes. For example,
Cameron's parent said that although Cameron had been assessed by a
doctor as having dyspraxia and hypermobility after one of his primary
teachers raised concerns, his primary school had not told his secondary
school. The parent reported that when they had contacted the primary
school about this, staff had said they did not have any information. This led
to the parent returning to the doctor to get the relevant reports again so they
could be given to the secondary school. Cameron's parent felt that the
secondary school not having this information had set him back when he
started secondary school. Lack of information-sharing at transition therefore
sometimes led to some pupils missing out on provision or experiencing
unnecessary delays.
Challenges with support
Tensions with the use of Tas
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
28/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
This section has already explored some of the ways in which TAs provided
support for pupils with SEND. The curriculum and subject knowledge of
support staff has emerged as a crucial concern because, very often, the
pupils who need access to the best teaching spend large amounts of
curriculum time with TAs - staff who have not had the same training as
teachers. This obviously raises questions about how effective intervention
support can be.
The evidence shows that some of the pupils spent significant periods of
time working with TAs outside of the classroom. For example, Connor
missed assemblies, Harper missed afternoon lessons and Robert missed
Spanish, religious education and sometimes other lessons to attend reading
and writing support sessions as well as additional mathematics sessions.
Maria and Madison were also both taken out of class for subject
interventions. Ava's parent and teachers reported that she needed help with
core subjects, especially reading, and also needed support to remain
focused. Ava spent every morning out of class in small group interventions
for English and mathematics, returning to the main classroom in the
afternoons. Additionally, she sometimes went to the year below for her
mathematics lessons.
Missing chunks of lesson time without the opportunities to access the same
full curriculum as their peers has implications for pupils with SEND. As
previously highlighted, they are not only not getting the high-quality teaching
they need from teachers, but are also likely to miss some key content with
which to build their knowledge, skills and understanding. In addition, they
will have less time to repeat and remember knowledge. This suggests that
they may be being offered a curriculum that does not have the same
ambition as that taught to peers.
In addition to concerns over learning loss, this is an issue for social
inclusion. Existing research suggests that segregating pupils through TA-led
intervention work can create challenges to including them.
[footnote 52]
Some
parents and carers in this study expressed concerns about this. For
example, Jackson's parent felt that although the TA interventions Jackson
received outside of class were beneficial, they were also concerned about
possible social exclusion from his peers:
"I've always asked does he go into class now and then? And does he sit
with his friends? Because I don't want it where they take him out and
then he's not included with his friends."
Jackson's parent, school 3, local authority 1
In addition to the potential for weak inclusion from intervention sessions, for
a few pupils, TA provision had created an over-reliance on a single adult,
with some negative consequences for pupils' experiences. For example,
Thomas could remember how upset he had been when his TA left in
Reception year, though he was currently in key stage 2. Similarly, Matteo's
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
29/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
parent recognised that he had become over-reliant on his one-to-one TA,
who had worked with him since Reception. On advice from the educational
psychologist, the school subsequently allocated 2 TAs at different times of
day. Despite the change, Matteo's parent reported that he became worried if
he did not have an adult with him. Matteo also voiced anxiety about this:
"The only thing I would change is to get another person for [TA2]
because she is always leaving me for 5 seconds and for that 5 seconds,
I basically need her because then I don't cope on my own. I feel kind of
alone. Then when she comes back, I'm coping again."
Matteo, school 4, primary, local authority 2
This dependence on adults can constrain pupils' independence and
confidence and reduce the likelihood of full and meaningful inclusion.
Alongside this, some school staff expressed concerns that there was not
enough funding to hire all the TAs they felt they needed to support pupils
with SEND. [footnote 53] For example, one of the schools had recently cut the
number of support staff due to budget constraints. Other schools described
similar worries around restructuring:
" we're currently about [...] to restructure stuff which is going to be
really difficult because that will have a knock-on effect with the additional
adults that we use and utilise the people that are working with pupils
day in day out, they will have less access to them."
Headteacher of school 2, primary, local authority 1
Some TAs described balancing the provision for pupils with SEND with
other roles. For example, Robert received help from a TA in core subject
lessons, but this was not as consistently available for other subjects, where
staff were shared between more pupils. Robert's TA reported, 'We are
pulled every which way.' This suggests that, at times, the TAs allocated to
Robert were not able to fully focus their attention on his learning across the
wider curriculum to the extent they should have.
[footnote 54]
The
evidence
suggests that, while schools view TAs as an important part of their provision
for pupils with SEND, there are associated challenges with this model.
Support not meeting needs
There were some examples of concerns about provision and the extent to
which it met or was perceived to meet pupils' needs. For example, some
participants raised concerns over curriculum coverage. Aaron had one-to-
one intervention for reading and phonics. His TA used sound flashcards and
word-wheels to practise phonemes. However, she reflected that he could
quickly become frustrated or disengaged: 'I can't push him too much as I've
got to just keep moving on'. This suggests this intervention or the method of
delivery was not working for Aaron, highlighting potential tension between
the additional provision, curriculum coverage and progress.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
30/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
Another example was Robert, who was reportedly struggling in reading. He
was significantly behind age-related expectations. His carer said that he
also struggled with handwriting and spelling. His carer felt that there was too
much for him to cover across the curriculum and wanted him to have more
intervention and tailoring of learning to tackle the gaps in his knowledge:
"I know it's singling them out but sometimes you have to go backwards
before you can go forwards and he knows himself that his handwriting is
really bad, and his spelling."
Robert's foster parent, school 6, secondary, local authority 2
The examples of Robert and Aaron suggest that the curriculum or teaching
provided was not fully matched to their needs and could potentially be
causing cognitive overload.
Other parents, carers and pupils commented that they felt current provision
did not sufficiently meet needs. For example, Connor received weekly
intervention for spelling, but his parent reported that this had little impact.
They expressed serious concerns about his lack of progress in English and
mathematics. They said they would like 'someone else just to help him a bit
more'. In contrast, his teacher felt that his needs were being met:
"I think his educational needs are being met and I think his emotional
needs are being met within the classroom with the level of support that
we give him I think that we're covering most of the bases with him."
Connor's teacher, school 5, primary, local authority 2
Connor himself was unsure of the help he received. He felt unsupported in
mathematics, despite his teacher reporting additional help with concrete
resources and detailed explanations. This example also suggests that when
teachers do not prioritise the curriculum content that pupils with SEND most
need to master, this can prevent their ability to deliver support effectively.
Matteo's parent felt that their school did not always adopt an approach that
was tailored to his needs. They had made suggestions to the school for
reasonable adjustments to help manage his needs. However, although
school staff referred to a range of strategies that were in place to support
Matteo and said these were enabling some progress, the parent felt the
school had not taken all suggestions on board and were not always flexible
in adapting to meet Matteo's needs:
"We are trying to help you, help him and you're not allowing [it]
I
understand there have to be rules, but if you've got a kid with a different
need and it's a genuine strategy that works, you should be flexing those
rules."
Matteo's parent, school 4, primary, local authority 2
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
31/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
In these examples, it seems that support was not planned appropriately to
meet needs. There were also concerns from some parents and carers that
the schools had not made reasonable adjustments. These examples
highlight the importance of strong collaboration between parents, pupils and
schools to co-produce provision. Without this, there will be barriers to
inclusion of pupils with SEND and also a potential risk of them continuing to
experience difficulties.
Summary
This section has discussed the principal ways in which schools worked to
meet the needs of pupils and meaningfully include them in the classroom
and wider school life. This involved developing deep understandings of the
strengths and needs of each pupil, making clear and well-thought-through
adjustments to the curriculum and having high expectations for the
outcomes they can achieve, academically and across their wider school life.
Schools also aimed to ensure that pupils felt included with their peers while
receiving interventions or other forms of support. Where staff did not
understand pupils well, those pupils' needs were identified less readily. The
curriculum was therefore not planned appropriately and help could therefore
not support pupils' learning as effectively. Sometimes, staff faced challenges
developing their own understanding of pupils with SEND. Factors such as
staff knowledge and pupils' coping mechanisms affected accurate and
timely identification of needs.
Alongside intervention programmes for pupils with SEND, schools used
TAs, tailored resources and adapted teaching. In addition, schools
considered environmental factors and the challenges of transition points. In
some cases, intervention programmes and other work with TAs saw pupils
taken out of their classroom, sometimes for significant amounts of time.
Inevitably, this meant that pupils were not being given full access to the
learning opportunities offered by teachers to their peers. Some pupils were
missing out on whole chunks of the curriculum due to time out of class. A
few others received teaching that parents, carers and staff felt did not meet
their needs. This highlights the risk of significant learning loss, which will
compound over time and mean that pupils with SEND may not be well
enough prepared for the next steps in their education.
The regular use of intervention sessions also raises the important issue of
curriculum and subject training for TAs to allow their role to be effective for
pupils' learning. TA deployment was also noted by some parents, carers and
school staff to hinder pupils' independence and social inclusion.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
32/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
The importance of home-school
relationships
Introduction
The quality of relationships between home and school has an impact on the
way schools plan and provide support for pupils with SEND. This
relationship is critical for ensuring that schools accurately identify and meet
the needs of children and young people. [footnote 55] A significant component
of this relationship is the extent to which schools work to develop co-
production with families, a way of working that brings together pupils,
parents or carers and education, health and care services when making
decisions about how best to support a pupil.
This section presents evidence with a focus on the second research
question. It looks at how the home-school relationships can influence the
timeliness and accuracy of identifying needs, and explores features of more
and less effective co-production with families.
Identifying need
Research suggests that early identification of SEND is crucial. Timely,
effective provision can help to narrow the educational gaps between pupils
with SEND and those without. [footnote 56] It can also help pupils with SEND
to adjust to school positively.
[footnote 57]
Most pupils had their SEND identified soon after starting formal education.
Identification of needs most frequently occurred in Reception, key stage 1 or
lower key stage 2 in primary school. We saw in the main 2 different
approaches of how schools and families worked together to identify the
needs of pupils with SEND:
separately, with parents and carers and the school working independently
initially
together, where the 2 parties collaborated with each other
This section explores how identifying need can be a collaborative process. It
will also examine how this impacts on the timeliness and accuracy of the
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
33/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
identification. In addition, it will highlight that even when there is good
collaboration and positive home-school relationships, there are some
additional factors that may influence the effectiveness of identification.
Collaboration for identification of need
The SEND code of practice
[footnote 58]
highlights the importance of
practitioners listening to parents and carers in order to understand their
concerns and to help with their analysis of pupils' needs. Some schools
talked about identification as a collaborative process between school staff
and parents and carers:
"
it would be around class teachers and teaching assistants, all
members of staff really, being aware of how pupils are behaving, is
anything out of the ordinary, are parents pointing out anything that
they've seen at home if that's then becoming a pattern."
SENCo, school 5, primary, local authority 2
We heard of examples of home-school collaboration that enabled the
identification of need and provision being put in place swiftly. For example,
Ryan's parent referred to sharing perspectives with the school to enable
them to develop a good understanding his needs: 'we worked out together
what some of his triggers are'.
At the time of the research, Ava's parent had an active role in the ongoing
identification process alongside school staff. Ava's parent described
speaking to the SENCo after their daughter joined the school towards the
end of Year 1:
"
it was noted at parents evening she wasn't keeping up with the other
pupils. So I said to SENCo she can't keep still, she's just a bouncing,
bouncing ball all the time you're seeing the same things as me she
said, we need a meeting and then things have started being put in
place."
Ava's parent, school 1, primary, local authority 1
The school had carried out a speech assessment and a receptive language
assessment to follow up on concerns. They also made sure they built on the
parent's knowledge and experiences to inform the preparation of documents
for the referral to a multi-agency panel.
Another example of collaborative identification leading to a rapid, positive
impact can be seen in the experiences of Nathan's parent. Nathan suddenly
developed social, emotional and mental health difficulties after an illness,
which resulted in him developing an intense fear of sickness. His parent
immediately spoke to the school, which put some provision in place for
Nathan's severe anxiety. His parent described working with the school to
see what they could do together. The school subsequently introduced books
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
34/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
about anxiety and a 'brave book' for him to record small achievements
throughout the day, which his parents felt had been very effective. Nathan
was also referred to an educational psychologist and subsequently to the
child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHS). The parent felt the
CAMHS sessions had helped Nathan to better manage his phobia, 'I think
he's got the skills now to cope with it [and] uses strategies that we use, and
the school and CAMHS have put into place'.
In this case, the collaboration and sharing of ideas between Nathan's parent
and his school led to specialist practitioner involvement that had a
significant positive impact on Nathan's social and emotional mental health.
Missed opportunities for collaboration
We also found some evidence of weak information-sharing between home
and school affecting the identification of need. For example, Harper's school
did not consult his parent during the identification process. In fact, his parent
was unaware that the school had placed him on their SEND register (see
'Insufficient information-sharing). As previously discussed, at the time of
interview, Aaron's needs had not been accurately identified. Aaron was said
by school staff to have difficulty expressing himself verbally but could still
communicate well with his friends. However, although he understood the
questions and could communicate with the interviewer using nods and other
signs, he struggled to speak when participating in the research. Aaron's
parent said they could not always understand what he was trying to say,
and that Aaron sometimes used signs to communicate at home. School staff
appeared to be unaware of Aaron trying to use signs. School staff also did
not appear to know that Aaron had experienced multiple problems with his
larynx and ears when young and that he had had several operations as a
result.
In addition, problems with partnership working and collaboration were
apparent. At the time of the study, Aaron was receiving speech and
language therapy in school but staff felt that it was not meeting his needs.
His teacher also reported that 'even speech and language have said they
are at a loss as to where to go next with him'. Despite the SENCo reportedly
expressing these views to the local authority education support service,
mentioning that his needs were possibly in 'medical realms', at the time of
research no changes to Aaron's provision had been planned. This suggests
that information may not have been shared effectively between
practitioners.
A combination of factors meant that Aaron was not receiving sufficient
provision to enable him to communicate effectively. Weaker collaboration
between home and school meant that his parent did not have a firm
understanding of his school experiences and staff did not have a good
enough understanding of his needs. Evidence of weak information-sharing
and collaboration between education, health and care professionals
suggests that they missed opportunities to accurately identify, assess and
provide for Aaron's needs (see 'Multi-agency collaboration'). In addition,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
35/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
despite health service involvement, it seems that there was a lack of further
action for developing the support package, including referral to additional
expert practitioners. The impact of this on Aaron's learning and development
highlights the importance of a full range of services being involved.
Co-production
Co-production is a way of working in which children and young people,
families and those that provide services work together. The aim is that
professionals listen to, understand and learn from the views of children and
families, and, in the fullest possible way, involve them in decisions about the
plans for support that will enable the child to achieve their goals. This
approach is widely seen as allowing more effective provision to be made for
children and young people with SEND. [footnote 59] Co-production is
advocated in the SEND code of practice. [footnote 60] Its principles are
embedded within the Children and Families Act.
[footnote 61]
Research
indicates that there are a range of factors related to the meaningful
involvement of families in decision-making. These focus on schools listening
to and learning from families, in order to build collaborative understandings
of individual children's strengths and needs. [footnote 62] Forming positive
relationships with families, nurturing trust, communicating clearly and
sharing information have all been found to be vital elements of practice for
co-production.
[footnote 63]
This section explores how and the extent to which schools have
collaborated with parents and carers to develop provision for children and
young people with SEND. [footnote 64] This often meant that a careful balance
had to be struck between the things that were important to the pupil and
family - their hopes and ambitions for the future - and what professionals
knew was important for the pupil to learn and do in order to achieve these
ambitions.
We saw different examples of co-production. Some parents and carers felt
that they were encouraged to work with schools on the things that might
benefit their son or daughter. This included making suggestions about
provision:
"It was a case of working closely with the school to just try and help him
and do different things."
Ryan's parent, school 3, primary, local authority 1
Jordan's school encouraged his parents to share beneficial exercises they
could do in school for his cerebral palsy. lan's parents suggested a class
move after an escalation in his behaviour. The school acted on this
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
36/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
suggestion and both lan's parents and school staff felt that this had a rapid,
positive effect on his behaviour.
Connor's parent reported emerging behaviours of crying and feeling sick in
the morning before coming to school. After discussion with the teacher, they
felt this was due to the school's move from ability grouping to mixed groups:
'I think that actually just threw him off and he then realised then that he just
couldn't do it'. After consultation with parents, the teacher and TA then
began meeting Connor at the door, so 'if he has been a little bit anxious
about coming in, he knows he's going to see us'. Connor also showed
anxiety with eating different foods during lunchtime. School staff noticed this
and spoke to Connor's parent, who reported that Connor had similar
difficulties at home. After this discussion, a member of staff began sitting
with Connor during lunches to encourage him to try different foods. This
strategy was successful, and his teacher reported, 'he now eats school
dinners and eats something different every single day'.
For co-production to be effective, pupils, parents and carers should be
involved as fully as possible in decision-making about new provision and
adaptations to existing support plans and packages. The examples above
demonstrate the beneficial effect of co-production on meeting needs and
enabling progress.
The role of communication in co-production
Good levels of communication between families and schools play an
important role within the process of co-production. To support this, some
schools set up regular, sometimes daily, methods of communication with
parents to share any changes or concerns. Schools also used formal and
informal communication channels to encourage parents and carers to
contribute to decision-making about their child. Parents and carers were
largely positive about the level of communication with schools. Formal
channels included, for example:
transition meetings
EHC plan reviews
parent evenings
Informal channels could include:
regular end-of-day catch ups with class teachers and TAs
home-school communication books
families calling schools to discuss concerns
Informal communication channels provided opportunities for parents or
carers to discuss concerns that may not immediately relate to their child's
support plan as well as highlighting emerging needs. This allowed the
school to prepare accordingly and put appropriate provision in place.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
37/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
Ethan's parent described speaking daily with the school to discuss his
'meltdowns'. They communicated with the school and discussed strategies
to prevent these from reoccurring.
Some schools offered 'drop ins' where parents could discuss things that
formal meetings may not cover:
"I do speak to the school a lot. If I've got a problem, [staff member] - I
email her or leave a message and she'll ring me back or if I've a
problem or if I want to know something. So they are good like that."
Robert's foster parent, school 6, secondary, local authority 2
"They've always consulted me and asked me to come in and speak to
them. And we've always [...] come in and had a chat."
Cameron's parent, school 7, secondary, local authority 2
Some parents or carers used home-school communication books to
maintain regular contact. These were used to share concerns, information
and observations between home and school. This could, at times, result in
the co-production of new provision. For example, Harper was refusing to
read at home and his parent used his home-school communication book to
express their concerns about this. The school created a reward system for
Harper using a bookmark, which led to an increase in his reading at home.
Written communication channels were also helpful for the family of one pupil
who had some difficulties with memory:
"Mum wanted a note of what he's done each day so she could talk about
it when he gets home because obviously it's not always clear and he
sometimes forgets so the communication between us and mum is like a
daily thing as well, isn't it?"
Thomas's TA, school 5, primary, local authority 2
Almost all schools spoke about the importance of maintaining
communication with parents and carers. Some staff described how it helped
them deliver appropriate provision, update the provision when required or
keep parents involved and informed throughout the EHC plan process.
Regular communication was considered to be essential for maintaining a
'holistic view' of a pupil and their needs:
"The times we'd meet parents are if there was a cause for concern, [we]
would ring, we would ask to meet parents and sit down and discuss that
holistic view. because there may be some issues that we don't know
about that are impacting on whatever the difficulty is in school and they
may be able to give us an insight into something. But then look at
planning together how we might move forward, whether it's from a
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
38/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
learning point of view, SEMH [social, emotional and mental health], or
whatever the difficulty might be."
SENCo, school 6, secondary, local authority 2
Schools that provided multiple means of communication created more
opportunities for parents and carers to share information or concerns. The
school was then better able to respond to these flexibly than might have
been possible through more formal channels. By maintaining open and
frequent communication, schools were able to build trust and strong
relationships with families and develop the culture of collaboration needed
for effective co-production.
The role of the SENCo in co-production
In common with previous research, we found that in some schools, the
SENCo played an important mediating and sense-making role for school
leaders and their colleagues but also for parents and carers.
[footnote 65]
Most
parents and carers valued their relationship with the SENCo, who was often
the first port of call when they wanted to discuss their child's needs. One
SENCo described how these discussions were valued and carefully
considered:
"If parents get in touch, I'll talk to them about what it is that they perceive.
And I'll speak to all the teachers we always want to obviously take the
parents' concerns on board and do whatever we can to support the pupil
and the parents."
SENCo, school 7, secondary, local authority 2
At times, the SENCo also played a mediating role in helping parents and
carers engage with external practitioners. For example, Ethan's parent
discussed how their SENCo had been looking into 'finding us something to
help with Ethan after school'. Another SENCo described helping families
with visits to the doctor (general practitioner (GP)) regarding pupils' needs:
"
what I always do is I ask parents if they would like me to write a letter
to back up what they're going to the GP for if I give that letter they do
tend to refer, so it's just to help them."
SENCo, school 4, primary, local authority 2
When parents and carers described a positive relationship with their school
SENCo, they appeared to be more satisfied with their child's provision. They
also appeared to be more certain that their views would be taken into
consideration by other school staff.
"I think [the SENCo] does have a plan of action with her I could ask,
I've never asked for one but I've put my whole trust in [the SENCo]
I
rely on [the SENCo] to inform me."
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
39/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
Ava's parent, school 1, primary, local authority 1
"I know that if I had something that I wanted to feedback then obviously I
can speak to [the SENCo] or any member of the team to put my views
across."
Amelia's parent, school 2, primary, local authority 1
The trust that many parents and carers had in their child's schools may
therefore have been influenced by their relationship with the SENCo, who
appears to play an important role in the building of relationships between
parents, carers and schools. Developing these relationships seems to be
integral to ensuring that parents and carers are listened to and able to
participate in the planning and review of provision. Ultimately, this should
encourage greater levels of co-production and a sense of partnership
between home and school. This relationship-building role of the SENCo is
therefore one essential element of delivering provision for pupils with SEND.
This has implications for school leaders, who should ensure that they
allocate sufficient time for it, enabling the SENCo to work effectively.
Challenges for co-production
While almost all school staff acknowledged the importance of co-production
with parents and carers, this practice was not evident in the experiences of
all families. The extent to which schools appeared to fully implement a
process of co-production and view parents and carers as partners varied.
Some of the factors negatively impacting co-production were:
parents and carers having insufficient information about their child's
needs and provision
limited opportunities for input into support plans and reviews from parents
and carers
lack of parent and carer engagement
However, even in schools where the process of co-production appeared to
be weaker, staff still seemed to be aware of its importance:
"I think certainly tightening up the process really around the processes
within school, so support plans making that more of a set thing and just
trying to involve parents as much as possible. That will make the most
difference really, in terms of pupils within school."
SENCo, school 5, primary, local authority 1
Insufficient information-sharing
Some parents and carers experienced inconsistent levels of communication
about their child's needs and provision. In one significant example of a
school failing to keep parents and carers informed, Harper's parent was
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
40/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
unaware that the school considered their child to have SEND until they were
asked, by the school, if they would take part in this research:
"It was a bit of a shock. It was like being told that everything's fine,
nothing's wrong, he's just a little bit behind, to, your pupil's now been put
on a register and we want you to speak to these people."
Harper's parent, school 5, primary, local authority 2
Harper's parent was not aware of the extent of his needs at school and how
much they were affecting his learning. His parent described how they had
previously asked the school about Harper's progress because they 'had an
idea that there was something' but were told that it was 'nothing to worry
about'. The lack of open information-sharing between the school and the
parent likely contributed to the fact that Harper's needs had not been
accurately identified at the time of the study and effective provision did not
appear to have been put in place. Harper's parent was not given enough
opportunity to share their concerns and the school did not draw on his
parent's knowledge to inform their understanding of Harper's needs. This
approach is inconsistent with the principles of co-production, with the parent
not being valued or involved. The SENCo acknowledged that this aspect of
the school process was something that could be improved.
"Actually, I probably could do with being a bit more, bit clearer around
where, what the communication would look like at different stages, so
stuff is not a surprise."
SENCo, school 5, primary, local authority 2
Some parents and carers who felt involved suggested that this was driven
by their own proactive approach to information-sharing rather than
collaboration between home and school. For example, although Ryan's
parent spoke of 'working closely' with the school, they also felt that they
were left to find out any useful information themselves and then share this
with the school, rather than working together with staff to reach a shared
understanding of needs and any provision that might benefit him:
"I feel like a lot of it was left to me and you do it because it's your child
and you want the absolute best for them. And talking to school I tried
to be really proactive in terms of, if I learned something I'd come and
share it with school."
Ryan's parent, school 3, primary, local authority 1
Another example of a parent feeling like they needed to take the initiative
with gathering information and organising provision was Thomas's parent,
who said they had to 'concentrate on fighting for him to get help' before he
started primary school.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
41/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
In a few instances, parents or carers contacted external services
themselves. For example, Connor's parents discussed contacting CAMHS
when he was having problems with his diet and how they felt they were the
ones pressing 'to get an answer to his eating'. These illustrations perhaps
suggest that in some cases, parents and carers felt the need to fill
perceived gaps in services in order to gain access to the health support
their pupil needed.
Limited opportunities for meaningful co-production
The degree to which parents and carers were given opportunities to provide
input into decision-making was inconsistent. These differences partly
depended on whether the pupil had an EHC plan or not, with most parents
and carers of pupils with EHC plans tending to be more involved in dialogue
and decision-making. In a few cases, no written school-level support plan
existed, limiting the scope of any co-production. In some schools, staff
shared plans and targets but did not give parents and carers the opportunity
to provide input beyond approving the plan:
"We share the targets with the parents so it does come from the school
but parents can have their view as well, so if they feel well, actually, I
don't feel this is right, I'll say well, actually, this is the evidence that
we've got."
SENCo, school 1, primary, local authority 1
A few parents spoke about positive communication with the school, but said
that this did not lead to action. Matteo's parent was given the opportunity to
contribute in EHC plan meetings to share their insights but felt that the
school did not always listen and act on that information:
"Whether it'll be heard or captured is a different matter. Because we have
discussed some of these things in previous meetings. And then it's 'oh
right, we don't need to change the plan - we'll do that in the IEPs
[individual education plans]. But then it doesn't happen."
Matteo's parent, school 4, primary, local authority 2
Alongside this, some parents and carers had less understanding of the
processes in place for reviewing and updating support plans. For example,
Thomas's parent felt confused and thought that the review was in place to
just confirm the allocation of the TA, rather than to discuss his provision in
more depth:
"So, to be honest I'm still a bit confused about... I know what there is in
place to help him and when we do the review it takes [...] 2 hours, when
we do his review. It's to keep his one on one..."
Thomas's parent, school 5, primary, local authority 2
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
42/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
In Ethan's case, the parent had a very good relationship with the school and
fully appreciated the work they were doing. This led to strong feelings of
trust but the parent's involvement was limited to agreeing to the plans that
school staff had created. This left the responsibility for decisions entirely
with the school:
"They just go above and beyond for Ethan... whatever school say I'll
agree with because obviously they're spending the time with him and
trying to get the work out of him and what he needs and stuff."
Ethan's parent, school 1, primary, local authority 1
These examples demonstrate that in some cases, although schools were
consulting with and engaging with parents and carers and therefore working
collaboratively, the opportunity for involvement in decision-making was
sometimes limited. This raises concerns for how well understood the
concept of co-production is and therefore how much parents and carers are
really viewed as partners.
In schools where there was less evidence of co-production, some parents
were dissatisfied with the school's approach but also appeared to blame
themselves, rather than the school:
"I think the school can do some more. But I could do more, do you know
what I mean?"
Connor's parent, school 5, primary, local authority 2
However, even where co-production was inconsistent, most parents and
carers still felt that the school would listen to them if needed and that their
child's school experiences were generally positive.
"I just feel like now I feel like I'm getting somewhere with Madison and
they are helping her. It's been a long time coming but [I] feel like [...]
she's now being helped."
Madison's parent, school 7, secondary, local authority 2
Parental engagement
On occasion, school staff talked about difficulties with engaging parents and
carers in discussion about additional or different provision for their child.
These schools reported that some parents and carers did not take up the
opportunities offered to understand what their child received or participate in
reviews. This could relate to specific interventions put in place or to
communication more broadly. For example, Jakob's teacher and TA talked
about how they had set up a home-school communication book that the
parents had 'never written in'. Aaron's parent talked about the school
providing them with speech and language work for Aaron to do at home, but
they chose to 'keep it in school' because Aaron was often tired when he got
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
43/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
home. They also discussed being invited to listen in on the meetings and to
observe the speech therapy sessions but said they did not normally attend
because Aaron was 'giddy' when they were present. This perhaps explains
why Aaron's parent appeared to be uncertain of how much progress he had
made over the year, the extent to which he was struggling at school and the
potential issues with his current speech and language programme.
Sometimes, relationships between parents and individual school staff
influenced engagement with a school. For example, Thomas's parent's
feelings of trust decreased when he moved year groups and had a different
class teacher:
"
he had a teacher last year that never really communicated with me
and I felt a bit like, I was trying to get stuff out of her all the time, but she
won't even come to the door to speak to me. I had a bit of a battle with
her all the time."
Thomas's parent, school 5, primary, local authority 2
Summary
This section shows how positive relationships and strong collaboration
between home and school are crucial for accurate and timely identification
of needs. Most of the schools had some mechanisms in place to allow
families to communicate with them. This included formal channels such as
parents' evenings, support plan meetings and contact with the SENCo, but
also informal processes such as daily check-ins and home-school books.
Some schools used information from families to inform decisions about
support packages and, in this way, treated parents and carers as partners in
decision-making. In our small sample, collaboration with families, including
strong relationships with the SENCo, supported schools in meeting pupils'
needs more effectively. Parents and carers were also more likely to have
high levels of trust in the school and feel able to share information with
them. The relationship-building element of the SENCo's role is crucial for
delivering effective provision through co-production. This has implications
for the time allocated to the SENCo by school leaders.
Weak information-sharing resulted in parents, carers or school staff being
unclear about pupils' needs. This meant that support for pupils was less
likely to be effective. In some schools, co-production was discussed, but in
reality, opportunities for parents and carers to contribute to planning and
decision-making were limited. In a few cases, there were no written support
plans, nor was a graduated approach to identifying, assessing and meeting
pupils' needs in place. This raises questions about some schools'
understanding of the concept of co-production and what it encompasses,
including how parents and carers should be involved in decision-making. In
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-sen
44/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
a few cases, parent and carer engagement with the school was not strong
and this presented challenges for working collaboratively.
Multi-agency collaboration and
partnership working
Introduction
The Children and Families Act [footnote 66] states that the task of planning and
evaluating provision for children and young people with SEND should be, as
far as possible, a partnership between schools, local authorities, health,
care and any commissioned service providers. When schools work in
isolation, some types of support are less likely to be available to a pupil or
young person with SEND. [footnote 67] However, research and Ofsted's area
SEND inspections suggest that putting in place effective multi-agency
collaboration can be challenging. [footnote 68] This was the case for most of
the schools in this study. They described frustrations with bureaucracy in the
SEND system that could lead to challenges for collaboration and
partnership working.
This section first explores local authority leaders' ambitions for collaborative
working and the ways it is facilitated. We will then consider the experiences
of families and schools and highlight some challenges of working with multi-
agency partners. The evidence presented therefore sheds light on the first 2
research questions by illustrating how pupils' needs are met and how
approaches to practice may vary.
In addition to interview data from school and family participants, this section
draws on further data from focus group representatives from 2 local
authorities and their respective CCGs.
[footnote 69]
Ambitions for collaborative working
Local authority and CCG staff in both local areas emphasised the
importance of collaborative working. Some staff described a 'team effort'
approach to providing services and recognised the importance of this in
enabling schools to meet pupils' needs:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
45/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
"
a joint service with the council, public health and our colleagues in
quality and safeguarding It's very collaborative working And we're
going in there with a very open mind, saying, this is who we are, this is a
team. We go in as a team effort."
Assistant director for community and transformation, CCG, local authority 2
"Decisions made about the pupils it's a multiagency process it's more
than just what happens in the classroom, it's ensuring that we act in a
multiagency way and I think our role is to coordinate that support so that
class teachers can deliver the best outcomes for those pupils."
Head of service education and SEND, local authority 1
Both local authorities promoted a quality mark for inclusion in their areas
that suggested a broader commitment to collaboration and partnership
working with schools. The mark was awarded to schools if they met certain
criteria and attended training sessions. Some local authority officers felt that
this encouraged schools to develop their practice in a meaningful way and
described how they tried to make sure it wasn't superficial:
" it was taking things to a [...] lengthier extension rather than it being
very formulaic, so if you turned up to 6 training sessions you can get the
kite mark, actually that's not inclusive practice because I could turn up to
the 6 training sessions. So we have just been pushing the boundaries a
bit and one of the merits of [local authority 1], school leaders want to
work with us to do that so they push back at us and they also push each
other as well."
Behaviour and exclusions lead, local authority 1
Leaders in both local areas felt that it was important that the ambition for
their inclusion work with schools drew strongly on the principles of
partnership working. This meant that they took steps to facilitate a cohesive
partnership approach between education, health and care services.
Facilitating collaborative working between schools
Leaders in both local authorities discussed multiple mechanisms that were
in place to promote collaboration with schools in the area. This included
facilitating opportunities for school staff to share good practice or discuss
this with local authority leaders. For example, in local authority 2, borough-
wide meetings for headteachers and SENCos were organised regularly
which local authority staff also attended. One SENCo who attended these
kinds of meetings said that they found them 'really useful' for professional
development.
"I've just come away from a meeting with all of our secondary and
college leads this morning, working on some of our specific areas of
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
46/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
concern around inclusion and looking at different ways that we can
support those young people and their families moving forward."
Assistant director for education, local authority 2
Local leaders in both areas felt that school networks provided opportunities
for them to share and develop inclusive approaches. The SEND lead in
local authority 2, for example, said that meeting with other leads allowed
'real champions of inclusion' to push for best practice. This was echoed by
the lead for behaviour and exclusions in local authority 1, who also
commented that school leaders who took part in similar types of
collaborative groups challenged each other to be more inclusive.
The role of the SENCo in collaborative working
As noted in the previous section, the SENCo could be especially important
when building relationships between schools and families. However, we saw
that they also played an important role coordinating provision from external
education, health and care services and helping school staff and families to
make sense of this. This involved, at times, taking the lead in
communication between services, schools and families:
"I'm very fortunate to have a superb SENCo She works very closely
with the parents. She's always on the end of the phone to
communicate with parents, communicate with the [local authority],
communicate with external agencies, work with the teachers, work with
TAs and the pupils."
Headteacher of school 3, primary, local authority 1
Some of the SENCos facilitated their own professional development by
engaging with networks provided by local authority meetings, multi-
academy trusts (MATs) and partnership work with special schools. This
could be through training opportunities, knowledge sharing, or pupil and
staff visits to settings. This appeared to have a beneficial impact on SEND
provision in schools.
"
.we've got a link with our local special school that we've got staff going
there on a Friday. They've done a TA swap in the local area where
staff spend a couple of weeks there. As headteachers, as part of our
group, we all went and spent a day there and had a look round."
Headteacher of school 5, primary, local authority 2
"We've looked at consistency and progress and the things that you want
to talk about as a SENCo, for 5 or 6 of us [from the MAT] get together,
maybe once every 6weeks and we set an agenda. So last time we met
we were looking at Dyslexia-friendly and that was something that came
up across the board for our schools that we felt wasn't a strength."
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
47/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
SENCo of school 2, primary, local authority 1
Not all the SENCos had the same amount of time to dedicate to the role.
Some had fixed time set aside each week specifically for SEND, while
others had a full-time teaching role or had other leadership responsibilities
in addition to their SENCo duties. This situation is well documented in other
research
[footnote
70] and is likely to impact on the extent to which SENCos
can develop networks and relationships with external partners. The extent
to which SENCos can access training, such as that offered by the local area
school networks, may also influence how well they can draw on up-to-date
knowledge and fulfil their role.
Collaboration for improvement
In local authority 2, council staff also discussed working with health
providers to improve services. For example, the director of the community's
family centres discussed how they had worked with CAMHS to improve
waiting times for autism assessments. CCG leaders also reported that their
work with the local authority had significantly reduced waiting times. They
said that virtual meetings were used to allow health and care professionals
in the borough to consider whether pupils had SEND and to seek each
other's advice. This was said to 'work well'.
In local authority 1, school staff spoke positively about multi-agency panels,
which involved different practitioners across local health services and
educational psychologists in identifying needs. The SENCo for school 3
noted that a recent referral they had made to this panel had 'been picked up
quite quickly' and commented that the parent had already received dates for
an assessment, concluding that things seemed be 'moving a little bit better'.
One teacher felt this multi-agency approach improved professionals'
understanding of a pupil as well as collaborative practice:
"I've found it a better route because they're looking at the whole pupil as
well their needs are getting addressed more efficiently and I feel that
there's more communication between professionals that way than
[when] we do separate referrals."
Ava's teacher, school 1, primary, local authority 1
School staff also spoke of the beneficial impact of recent changes by some
health services, leading to improved levels of collaboration.
"CAMHS have now changed the way that they work in [local authority]
which has been good. So [safeguarding lead], she can go to reflective
practice meetings, so it might not be direct work with the pupil, but it is
an opportunity to sit down and speak to that specialist and say right now
I've got this pupil who's presenting like this."
SENCo, school 2, primary, local authority 1
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
48/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
Although it was not clear whether this collaboration had developed between
partners independently or as a result of local authority involvement, it
demonstrates the benefit that partnership working can have for children and
young people with SEND.
In addition to these mechanisms for facilitating collaboration and partnership
working, local authority 1 introduced a funding agreement whereby it and
the CCG agreed to equally share costs for SEND. Some respondents felt
that this approach had brought about increased collaboration between the 2
parties:
"We've got really good relationship with the local authority we've got
[an] arrangement on funding which I think is really it's really helpful, it
just stops all those arguments."
Commissioning manager, CCG, local authority 1
Some members of the CCG in local authority 1 discussed carrying out
'quality audits' of local area paediatric services and special schools.
However, engagement with the mainstream school sector at the time of
interview was much less established in both local authorities. In local
authority 1, the CCG described plans to carry out an audit with mainstream
providers. In local authority 2, however, the CCG did not appear to have any
direct engagement with mainstream schools.
"We don't necessarily work directly with mainstream schools there's a
SEND partnership board which has representatives from education and
from schools. I suppose we would get our input from the schools via
that."
Assistant director for commissioning and transformation, CCG, local
authority 2
Partnership working with health providers was said to be 'patchy' in local
authority 1. This led to it challenging some elements of its practice.
However, although there were concerns over partnership working with
health providers, these were felt to be developing well - in fact, more
strongly that those with social care:
" ..we've done a lot of work with health colleagues' annual review
processes They know the quality of what we need for them and
actually it's not alright just to say they didn't turn up for 3 appointments
we've discharged them and that's it. I would say we are further into a
journey with health than with social care but that's just been a time thing.
There's still some way to go."
Head of service education and SEND, local authority 1
Location of services
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
49/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
Some representatives from both the local authority and CCG discussed how
the location of services could have an impact on the strength of
collaboration. The physical proximity of different teams, either within the
same buildings or through the creation of multi-team meetings or working
groups, was felt to have a beneficial impact. Representatives saw this as a
way of enabling staff to access each other and of building trust between
partners.
"It helps that I sit in an office with heads of service for [other departments
working with pupils with SEND]. so there are "across the table"
discussions when we are talking about pupils."
Head of service education and SEND, local authority 1
Staff from the local authority and CCG in the other local area were situated
in the same building, but they did not explicitly mention any benefits this
brought in terms of collaboration. However, CCG leaders did note that
communication processes had changed following a previous area SEND
inspection. The director of children's services had subsequently brought the
CCG into a formal relationship with the local authority. CCG staff had also
been formally added to the attendee list of management meetings:
"
one of the really good things about the SEND inspection was that out
of that [the director of pupils' services] included me in that wider
management team with his staff, so that was a really good way of
finding out what was happening across all pupils' services."
Director for commissioning and transformation, CCG, local authority 2
The data showed that local authorities and CCGs were employing a range
of mechanisms with the aim to promote partnership working among
education, health and care professionals. Schools and local area
representatives felt that some of these were successful. Ambitions for
strong collaborative working were also evident. However, the experiences of
families did not always match these ambitions, and some respondents felt
that there were significant challenges to collaboration in current practice.
These will be explored in further detail below.
Home and school experiences of multi-agency
collaboration and partnership working
Accessing multi-agency provision
Some of the pupils in the study received education, health and care service
input from outside of the school as part of their provision. This included, for
example:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
50/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
speech and language therapy
physiotherapy
children and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS)
educational psychologists
local authority SEND teams
A smaller number received treatment from other health professionals, such
as doctors and paediatricians.
Leaders in both local authorities discussed ways of making themselves
available to schools for help and advice. For example, local authority 2 had
an education support service [footnote 71] that visited schools. They worked
with SENCos throughout the year to provide advice and guidance about
pupils with more significant needs. They also provided subject-specialist
teachers for some pupils and other specialist educational practitioners.
SENCos and headteachers in local authority 2 who spoke about this
approach were very positive. School staff felt that the services provided
them with valuable input:
"
the agency that has the most input with us really is our [education
support service]. So they're brilliant at providing extra support and then
they'll come in and do some assessments for us if we need their
support. They'll give us advice. They'll attend meetings with parents
So there's people who have their specialties
"
SENCo for school 7, secondary, local authority 2
Some specific examples of positive impact of support and advice from
external services are the speech and language therapist team working with
Thomas and an educational psychologist working with Matteo. Thomas's
family had received home visits from a speech and language therapist to
help them develop new communication strategies. The therapist worked
with his family to improve his ability to communicate using PECS (Picture
Exchange Communication System). This had a significant impact and, at
the time of the study, Thomas no longer required this system. Matteo's
parent explained how external services had previously collaborated with
them and the school after identifying his over-reliance on his TA. The school
listened to these concerns and employed a second TA to work with Matteo
for half of the day to develop his independence and inclusion:
"
it was ed psych and outreach and they could see how reliant he was.
And when [TA] was off sick or anything, his day was horrendous they
said maybe we need to swap it around a little bit, have some time with
somebody else. So, it was very much like a joined-up conversation
between us, the outreach and school."
Matteo's parent, school 4, primary, local authority 2
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-sen/
51/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
Challenges for timely access to external specialist services
Information about the pupils in this study suggested that the way in which
the external professionals involved in their care worked with them, their
families and their schools varied. Of course, provision differed based on
each individual pupil's need, but one main challenge emerged from
participants' experiences of working with external professionals. This related
to variations in access to specialist services. Specific issues were concerns
about delays and waiting lists, and frustrations with bureaucracy. This
section explores families and schools' experiences of these issues.
Delays and waiting lists
Even when there was agreement about the need for assessment or
appointments, several families and schools felt they did not have sufficient
or timely access to local authority and health service provision. This was
often attributed to waiting lists for appointments or services not being
provided frequently enough. Issues related to a variety of health services,
including speech and language therapy, occupational therapy and CAMHS.
" waiting lists for CAMHS are horrific. So especially with the more
higher-level interventions and we had a pupil who ended up going to
special school that was turned away from CAMHS."
SENCo, school 5, primary, local authority 2
Delays for assessments were also mentioned by some participants. For
example, lan's parent said that they had been waiting for 6 months for a
paediatric assessment of his needs despite receiving a letter confirming his
referral to this service. School staff also talked about assessment delays
being a source of frustration:
"I have a pupil in my class in year 2, I started his assessments in
reception halfway through and I'm still so that is really frustrating and
for parents because we start the process and we're right, we're going to
get this for your pupil and then it just doesn't happen."
SENCo, school 3, primary, local authority 1
A headteacher from another school said they had waited 60 months for one
pupil's EHC plan to progress from assessment to 'getting the plan
approved. This was apparently due to staffing issues in the local authority.
When Jordan was in Year 2, his school requested that the EHC plan be re-
written following new advice from an educational psychologist. However, at
the time of data collection mid-way through Year 3, Jordan's EHC plan had
not been re-written. The SENCo had also observed delays in EHC plans for
other pupils that were attributed to the absence of crucial staff:
"The EHC coordinator that was working with him had gone off on sick
and [the plan] just was sitting on someone's desk which is really
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
52/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
frustrating."
SENCo, school 3, primary, local authority 1
Other participants also had concerns about the timeliness of access to
crucial services:
"I think sometimes the system just lets the pupils down because.
it
doesn't kick into action quick enough and identify those pupils that need
help at the point where they should have it."
Robert's foster parent, school 6, secondary, local authority 2
"He [Cameron] is someone that we feel needs some support and has
been let down a little bit it was difficult but because he wasn't
identified as being as having any special educational needs until Year 7,
it's been a longer process
"
SENCo, school 7, secondary, local authority 2
A few respondents had concerns that went further than those related to the
timeliness of access. They noted an absence of appropriate expert
provision, particularly from health professionals:
"I'll send out invitations to invite to paediatricians, speech and language,
school nurses and it's very rarely that they turn up. And that's frustrating
for me because I'm then having to get on the phone, speaking to them
more it's got to be a 2-way process, but if they came and if it was
multi-agency more, it would support these pupils a lot more."
SENCo, school 1, primary, local authority 1
In an attempt to reduce the impact of long waiting lists, some families and
schools were either contemplating or taking steps towards trying alternative
diagnostic routes or making referrals at an earlier stage:
" .making those referrals earlier, rather than wait until the end of
reception to say oh, actually his speech and language hasn't really
come on that much this year. So let's do it now. Because the waiting lists
are huge "
SENCo, school 2, primary, local authority 1
"
if I know that we are heading towards a psychologist, I will say to mum
or dad, go to your GP try and get a paediatrician appointment so that by
the time we've already got that, so we're trying to save time there."
SENCo, school 4, primary, local authority 2
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
53/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
Aaron received help from speech and language services and a therapy
programme was being delivered in school. However, school staff felt this
was not meeting his needs and enabling progress. The teacher also
reported that 'even speech and language have said they are at a loss as to
where to go next with him'. It seems that in this case, despite the
recognition that provision was not effective, there had been no improved
understanding of Aaron's needs or any changes to the support he received.
Clearly, concerns over delays and waiting lists for external provision were
prevalent, even within the small sample for this study. Where these
occurred, they caused frustration for families and schools and had a
potential impact on pupil progress.
Frustrations with bureaucracy for EHC plan assessments
As mentioned previously, some participants experienced delays with EHC
plan assessments, describing high levels of bureaucracy within the
assessment process. This was another area of frustration for schools and
families. Both local authorities described trying to improve their EHC plan
assessment process and reduce delays, with local authority 2 aiming to
reduce the number of applications. They reported that this work focused on
enabling more of their schools to confidently offer appropriate support for
pupils within school, with the expectation that this would reduce the need for
formal EHC plans:
"...we know not all of those pupils need plans So we need to
give
schools the confidence and the resources and support to support pupils
in mainstream settings and then we need to give parents the confidence
that that offer's available at the moment, some of that exists brilliantly
across our schools and some of it doesn't so we're working on that."
Assistant director for education, local authority 2
Representatives from local authority 1 indicated that their approach to
improving the EHC plan assessment process aimed to ensure that a rich
quality of evidence was provided to enable the panels to make good
decisions:
"So we start off with a very robust process that we challenge as a local
authority and I think over the last definitely over the last 2 years the
evidence that has been provided to us has become more detailed, more
in depth and our decision making is better."
Head of service education and SEND, local authority 1
However, some school staff believed that this focus on demonstrating, in
depth, what had already been done or providing increased detail could in
fact result in delays for pupils. They also perceived the local authority
challenge as an indication that their professional perspective was not
valued. This has potential implications for creating a trusting collaborative
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
54/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
partnership approach. Some participants felt that the steps they now
needed to take to 'prove' that a sufficient range of approaches had already
been tried was a barrier to ensuring that timely provision was put in place
for children and young people:
"To have an EHCP you have to show the EP [educational psychologist]
that that pupil has had 2 terms [of] one to one support. So we have a
TA to sit with that pupil for 2 terms."
Headteacher, school 4, primary, local authority 2
"
we need to make sure we've given extra reading support for 6 weeks,
so they can't question have we tried that it's putting in the paperwork
in place as a counter defence because from a professional point of
view, you know where they need the support."
Thomas's teacher, school 5, primary, local authority 2
"I try and do my best [for] the pupils, collect the evidence, get all the
evidence from the professionals involved, I'll submit an education and
health care plan and then they'll come back and say ah actually, we're
wanting this now, but that wasn't in their original criteria when I
submitted it. So then I have to go back, get that information, submitted it,
oh well now because if we're waiting for that the educational
psychologist report is out of date sometimes I just feel the local
authority are making it harder to get an education, health and care plan
for the pupils."
SENCo, school 1, primary, local authority 1
The data presented above suggests that schools' capacity to meet local
authority requirements at the point of EHC plan assessment was a
challenge. Other school respondents described the detailed requirements
for evidence as a source of 'frustration'. They appeared to regard this as
unnecessarily bureaucratic rather than as a way to ensure good decision-
making.
Some respondents felt that these kinds of bureaucratic delays also occurred
in health referrals outside of the EHC plan process.
"
we did a complex needs referral to the paediatrician and we were
told no because he had to have a speech and language referral first and
then we have to act on those outcomes for 3 months. And if that doesn't
work which it still isn't. So now we've got to re-refer."
SENCo, school 3, primary, local authority 1
There was some evidence that the push from local authorities for high levels
of detail and evidence of previously attempted interventions or other help
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
55/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
had led to a breakdown of trust between the local authority and some
school staff:
"Whenever they come and talk to us at the directors briefing they tell us
how much money they have saved on special educational needs
because the budget is so high. But that has an impact on our pupils
they said how many education and health care plans they'd turned down
that month and I felt that that was very inappropriate because you don't
fill all those forms in if you don't think a pupil has a need
"
Headteacher, school 1, primary, local authority 1
Overall, we found evidence that local authorities were aiming to improve the
way they approached the EHC plan process and allocate their potentially
limited resources, but that some reforms or process steps were viewed by
schools and families as an overly bureaucratic source of frustration. This
had a potentially negative impact on the experience of school staff and the
nature of partnership working during the EHC plan assessment. However,
ultimately, the process was perceived as a barrier to timely access to
specialist services for some pupils with SEND.
Parents and schools filling in gaps
One factor in the differences in the pupils' experiences was the extent to
which families and schools could fill in the gaps when they were unable to
access specialist services and expertise. A lack of specialist input led to a
few families organising this privately. For example, Isaac's family privately
funded visits to a child psychologist when he started secondary school after
they did not 'really get very far through the normal channels'. Jordan's
parents paid for private physiotherapy for him while he waited to receive a
diagnosis of cerebral palsy. They continued to pay for private treatment after
Jordan began to receive NHS physiotherapy and occupational therapy
because they felt the sessions were too infrequent. In addition, Jordan's TA
reported concerns over his physiotherapy programme after an operation
and 'carrying on with the same physio when things had changed for him
physically. I didn't want to do the wrong thing'. This suggests that the
physiotherapy programme being followed in school had not been updated
by health practitioners and school staff were working to fill this gap. The
impact of this was that support staff were not confident to deliver the
therapy.
However, attempting to fill in the gaps left by the specialist services in a
local area increased the risk of pupils not having their needs fully identified
and met. Madison's parent suspected that Madison had dyscalculia, but the
SENCo explained that, currently, the local authority did not provide
dyscalculia assessments. Madison's parent was concerned that she would
continue to struggle with numeracy without additional help so paid for
private mathematics tuition. As well as this, the school tried to help Madison
with mathematics, without formal assessments or advice from external
professionals, by using their own more limited training:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
56/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
"I'd done some training on dyscalculia so we obviously we made sure
that staff were aware The maths teacher also did some training on
that when [Madison] was in year 7."
SENCo, school 7, secondary, local authority 2
Another school also reported focusing on internal professional development
in response to issues with accessing external services:
"In the school, it's continuing to train staff or make staff fully aware of all
the issues that impact on SEN. Because we're [struggling] for these
outside agencies, we've got to try and do a lot of it more ourselves now
we can't keep waiting."
SENCo, school 4, primary, local authority 2
Some parents pressed health providers when they felt an initial assessment
had not been accurate, to try and ensure correct identification and
assessment of need. However, family respondents did not always feel
confident that they could find a way to be heard or in their ability to make a
difference for their children:
" they always said to me it was because he was delayed, because he
was premature. But I knew it was, there was more to it than that Every
time I would question stuff. So, when he was about 18 months and it
was like no, it's not because he's premature, there's something else not
right."
Thomas's parent, primary, local authority 2
"You do feel completely unsupported. I'm a pretty proactive person so I'll
seek it out and I'll make it happen, but I can't even do that."
Matteo's parent, school 4, primary, local authority 2
Even 2 years after the diagnosis of Connor's sensory processing disorder
by CAMHS, his parent felt that they needed more information and that they
were at a loss as to what to do to help him:
"Just someone who can explain to me how to get him the help he needs
because there isn't anything. It's like, I don't know, so they diagnose and
see you later! And that's all there is, do you know what I mean?"
Connor's parent, school 5, primary, local authority 2
The SENCo reported that Connor had previously received some speech
and language therapy but at the time of the research, this had ended. The
school and the parent appeared to have worked together to develop his
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
57/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
current provision without multi-agency input. This lack of joined-up external
support is likely to have impacted how effective any provision might be.
These examples of strategies employed by a few participants to secure
support for their children are no substitute for timely access to high-quality
specialist services. In addition, they are dependent on families' and schools'
financial and personal resources and so are not an inclusive alternative to
provision from the SEND system.
Summary
Both local authorities had mechanisms in place to promote collaborative
working between education, health and care services. Local authority
initiatives included education support services and school consortiums,
which were valued by school staff. They were seen as effective for
developing inclusive practice, allowing staff to draw on specialist
knowledge, and also facilitated collaborative practices.
However, this did not always translate into positive experiences for pupils,
families and schools. Many schools and families valued the services they
received, but some pupils were not receiving adequate help even when
services were involved.
School SENCos played a crucial role in securing input from external
professionals which was critical for securing joined-up provision. The extent
to which the SENCo can devote time to their role and the amount of training
they received is therefore likely to influence outcomes for children and
young people. In common with previous research, this section has
[footnote 72]
shown that this varies between SENCos at different schools, with some
expected to carry out their duties alongside a full teaching load.
Based on a strong ambition for collaborative multi-agency working, both
local authorities had put in place initiatives to promote this practice and
respond to some of the challenges experienced by families and schools.
However, in line with existing research, we found that collaboration between
schools, families and education, health and care services was not always
smooth [footnote 73] Waiting times and the reported bureaucracy of the SEND
system were a significant challenge for some schools and families. This led
to problems with timely access to specialist services and frustrations for
SENCos in the planning and coordination of support. A lack of timeliness
with access to services could lead to schools and families filling in the gaps
to help children and young people with SEND access what they needed to
learn and develop. Where this occurred, some schools and families drew on
financial and personal resources. However, this alternative is not possible
for most families and should not be required if the SEND system is working
effectively to provide timely access to multi-agency services.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
58/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
Discussion
This research has taken a case study approach to explore the experiences
of children and young people who, at the time of data collection, were
studying in mainstream schools. This final section draws together the main
findings, and the highlighted text below answers the study's research
questions.
Research question 1: How are the needs of children
and young people met in mainstream schools?
Teachers, TAs and SENCos worked closely with pupils to understand
them as individuals so that adaptations to the curriculum and school
environment could be tailored to each child. Their needs were met more
effectively where this work was co-produced with families and with
external agencies working as a team to put appropriate provision in
place.
Many of the children received support from one-to-one TAs. Some did
not access the full curriculum and spent extensive periods of time
outside of the classroom learning on their own or in a small group with
TAs. This raises questions about how the curriculum is being designed
and taught for some children with SEND. Quality education for pupils
with SEND relies on day-to-day classroom practice, with TAs and
teachers sharing curriculum goals, and having the necessary subject,
curriculum and specialist knowledge.
Research question 2: To what extent does the
approach schools take to identifying, assessing and
meeting these needs vary between providers?
Mechanisms for sharing information with families and eliciting help from
external agencies did not work equally effectively for all of the pupils.
Co-production between families and schools, the time the SENCo had
to devote to their role and the extent to which external agencies worked
together all influenced how well children were helped to learn and
interact with their peers.
Some schools and families took steps to try and fill in the gaps when
multi-agency working was not successful, while others were not in a
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
59/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
position to do SO. This resulted in differences in the extent to which
pupils' needs were met.
In-school provision
Typically, schools took a pupil-centred approach to their provision for
children and young people with SEND. This primarily drove staff to develop
deep understandings of the strengths and needs of each pupil they
supported. Having high expectations for what pupils could achieve and
ensuring that they felt included with their peers were also important features
of practice. These factors, alongside the development of positive
relationships between staff and pupils, were seen by many participants as
important for creating effective provision. Despite this ambition, there were
apparent gaps in understanding of some pupils' starting points, and their
strengths and needs. This had an impact on how well adaptations helped
pupils learn and develop.
The pupils who were part of this study had unique needs. For the most part,
these needs were identified soon after they started formal education.
However, some pupils' needs were not accurately identified until later in
their primary education or even when they reached secondary school,
despite there being concerns about their learning or development at a
younger age. For some pupils, this was because their needs were masked,
for example by the child's coping strategies. For others, it was because
school staff did not appropriately plan curriculum content to make it
accessible for pupils with SEND. We also saw examples where schools and
families lacked necessary multi-agency input. Staff knowledge was found to
be a critical factor in how well a pupil's needs were understood. This shows
the importance of continuing professional development for SEND and
greater access to staff or practitioners with specialist SEND expertise when
working towards the accurate and timely identification of need.
School staff worked in a range of ways with pupils with SEND to include
them in the classroom and in wider school life. Schools made adjustments
to support pupils socially and emotionally and this went some way to
increasing those pupils' access to the curriculum. Teachers adapted their
teaching and used tailored or specialised resources. Access to quiet spaces
and strong communication between teachers and schools at transition
points were also important.
Almost all the pupils in this study had TAs allocated to them and most
parents and carers were very positive about the support they provided.
Many pupils were taken out for intervention activities delivered by TAs,
which meant they were spending curriculum time out of class and were not
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
60/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
able to participate in the same learning opportunities as their peers. Some
pupils were missing entire chunks of the curriculum. The fact that several
pupils were taken out of class for TA-led interventions raises concerns about
pupils with SEND having full access to the high-quality teaching they need
in order to have the best chance of success. It raises the risk of learning
loss in some curriculum areas for these pupils. It also suggests that the
curriculum offered may not always have the same ambition as that
curriculum taught to pupils without SEND.
Interventions were often delivered by TAs. This raises questions not only for
staff collaboration but also for support staff training. Interventions will only
be useful if intended curriculum goals are clear and if staff have strong
enough subject and curriculum knowledge to deliver them or are under the
close supervision of someone who does. Research suggests that
interventions of this nature need to be high-quality and designed in such a
way as to minimise pupils' over-reliance on particular adults.
[footnote 74]
It
follows that strong collaboration between teachers and TAs is vital to ensure
clarity of learning intentions but also that good subject and curriculum
knowledge is required in order to deliver intervention activities successfully
for pupils. It is therefore crucial that TAs, who supervise the learning of
children and young people with SEND, have the requisite subject and
curriculum knowledge to support pupils who have struggled to learn the
intended curriculum at the same time as their peers. Given the fact that
pupils with SEND are likely to have poorer outcomes than pupils without
SEND, [footnote 75] they deserve and need the very best teaching to enable
them to make the same progress as their peers.
Training towards robust subject-specific knowledge of the curriculum is
therefore an important element of ensuring that the TA role works effectively
for children and young people with SEND, including opportunities for all
those involved in supporting pupils with SEND to gain additional
qualifications.
Other implications related to the routine deployment of TAs also emerged.
Regular time out of the classroom in small groups and individual sessions
led some participants to express concern about the resulting social
exclusion of pupils. In addition, concerns about pupils' over-reliance on
adults raises questions about pupil independence.
Occasionally, participants felt that the curriculum content being taught to the
pupils was not easily accessible and did not meet their needs. Due to
missed prior learning or unmet needs, the pupils did not have some of the
required foundational knowledge and skills to build on. In addition, they
were not always given the chance to master basics before moving forwards.
When this occurs, it is likely that pupils will continue to experience
difficulties and their gaps in understanding will progressively widen. This
implies that the chances to succeed in the future would not be available for
all pupils.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
61/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
The SENCo played a crucial role in collaborating with parents and in
coordinating input from multi-agency professionals. This has also been
highlighted in previous research [footnote 76] While SENCos were clearly
playing an important role in building relationships with families and
coordinating service assessments or programmes, they also had differing
amounts of time available to devote to their role and to access continuing
professional development. Some were fulfilling the SENCo role alongside
full-time class teacher responsibilities. This indicates that in some schools,
the role of the SENCo is not strongly prioritised. This will affect how well
they can carry out their role and facilitate positive outcomes for children and
young people.
Co-production
Previous research has shown that provision is more effective where it has
been co-produced with children, young people and their families.
[footnote 77]
In our small sample, positive, trusting relationships and strong collaboration
between home and school, in particular with the SENCo, were found to
promote the accurate and timely identification of need and co-production of
provision. Some of the parents and carers in our sample had ample
opportunities to discuss and decide support with schools and felt well
supported by individual members of staff, such as the SENCo or a class
teacher. They were also more likely to have confidence in the school's
broader approach to inclusion. Both formal and informal communication
channels that allowed for frequent information-sharing between families and
schools strongly facilitated this co-productive approach to meeting pupils'
needs.
Although mechanisms for co-production were often in place at school-level,
implementation was not always meaningful. Delays to identifying and
meeting needs for a few pupils were exacerbated by parents and carers not
being given sufficient information about their child's learning and
development. Some parents and carers were also not given opportunities to
meaningfully input into support plans by, for example, contributing to targets
or evaluating provision. As a result, some families did not have a good
understanding of their child's school experiences, and some school staff
were less certain of pupils' needs because they were lacking the information
needed to fully understand a child. At times, parents and carers were
provided with support plans without opportunities to contribute to planning
or decision-making. In a few cases, no written support plan existed at all,
suggesting that there was no graduated approach in place and no
opportunities for co-production. In a few cases, there was also a lack of
parent and carer engagement. When this happens, support for pupils is less
likely to be effective. This also raises concerns about how schools
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
62/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
understand the concept of co-production and how authentically parents and
carers are viewed as partners.
Multi-agency working
In order to ensure good quality provision that met the needs of pupils with
SEND, both participating local authorities offered a wide range of multi-
agency specialised services to schools. This specialised support
complemented what was offered by schools. Families and school staff
valued the input from external services. However, it appeared that some
pupils were not receiving help that adequately met their learning and
development needs even when multi-agency services were involved.
Local authorities described a strong commitment to collaborative working
between education, health and care providers. Some local authority multi-
agency structures for enabling this partnership working, such as the
education support services and SEND networks, were especially valued by
school staff. This was because they enabled access to specialist knowledge
that could impact positively on the planning of provision to meet pupils'
needs.
This study found evidence that access to the expertise of multi-agency
services and providers could strongly influence the nature, quality and
extent of support pupils received. Although efficient multi-agency working
was the ambition of the 2 local authorities in this study, this did not always
translate into improved practice and positive experiences for children and
young people, families and schools. Waiting times for assessments and
perceived bureaucracy, in particular relating to the EHC plan assessment
process, were reported to be significant challenges for some schools and
families. Delays in identification and assessment of needs could have a
long-term impact on children and young people with SEND. In a few
instances, even when multi-agency services were involved, a failure to refer
or share information between professionals meant that in some cases
pupils' targets and support plans were outdated and their needs unmet.
Some schools and families felt that pupils did not have access to the full
range of practitioners needed and responded to this by attempting to fill
gaps in provision, for example by accessing private therapy or only using
knowledge available to them in school to try and design support. These
types of mitigating strategies are no substitute for timely access to specialist
multi-agency services for all pupils who require them. In addition, some of
the strategies used by families and schools were dependent on their own
financial and personal resources. This is not an inclusive alternative to
services and support mechanisms that are meant to be provided as part of
the SEND system and suggests that the playing field is not level for all
pupils. It highlights the importance of a full range of appropriate multi-
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
63/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
agency expertise being available to both plan and provide support that
effectively meets pupils' needs.
Implications
What the evidence highlights is the importance of all professionals within
the SEND system working collaboratively to understand the child and co-
produce the plans for provision with families. It also underlines how robust
curriculum and subject knowledge alongside a strong understanding of
SEND must be present to maximise the learning and development of pupils
with SEND. These are important factors that will enable children and young
people with SEND to have access to the range of opportunities they need to
succeed in life. This is vital to ensure that they are able to progress
confidently to the next stage of their education, training or employment and
achieve well.
Pupils in this study experienced support in their mainstream schools in a
variety of ways, sometimes even when they had a similar or the same
identified need. While individuals are working hard and with care, this
variability in provision is not an indicator of a system working effectively for
children with SEND. For example, mechanisms for sharing information with
families and eliciting help from external agencies need to work equally
effectively for all pupils so that appropriate provision is in place consistently.
This highlights the importance of a full range of appropriate multi-agency
expertise being present and available to both plan and provide support that
meets pupils' needs, and for support plans to be co-produced with children
and their families.
Some of the pupils in our sample were thriving. They were accessing the full
curriculum alongside their peers, were making progress and were fully
included in the wider life of their schools. Others were accessing a more
limited curriculum or were excluded from particular events and activities.
This highlights broader issues for debate about what 'success' looks like in
supporting pupils with SEND.
The experiences documented here also highlight the fact that school staff
sometimes have difficult decisions to make about how best to support their
pupils. Pupils with SEND may take longer to master particular areas of the
curriculum. They may need to study a reduced number of subjects or
receive interventions out of the classroom to ensure that they learn as much
as possible. However, as previously discussed, this has implications for the
extent to which children can be included in school life. There were also
documented examples of pupils with SEND being over-reliant on their TAs.
Despite this, though, TAs were a popular method of support with parents.
Co-production is an important component of effective provision, but difficult
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
64/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
decisions need to be balanced between parental wishes and what is best
for the child.
This report has shown that school practitioners need regular continuous
professional development to strengthen and update subject and curriculum
knowledge. This is important so that all practitioners working with children
with SEND, including TAs, who may deliver significant components of
children's education, receive training to help them teach effectively. This
report has highlighted, however, that curriculum knowledge is not the only
area that training could fruitfully focus on. Our research found that many
school staff used labels, such as autism, attention deficit and hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) and dyspraxia, to describe children with SEND. This
suggests that practitioners should be familiar with the wide-ranging debate
around the use of labels for SEND and the potential problems this can
create for effective inclusive practice and possibly for pupils themselves. In
particular, they should understand that assigned labels are not the focus.
Instead, it is more important to understand pupils as individuals with unique
strengths, removing barriers to learning and providing support that meets
needs and makes a positive difference.
Appendix 1: Detailed methodology
This appendix gives details of the methods of data collection and the
sample included in the research.
Sample
The research was centred around the experiences of 21 pupils with SEND.
These pupils were drawn from a sample of 7 mainstream schools within 2
local authorities. Of these pupils, 7 had an EHC plan, 1 from each school
sampled.
School staff purposively selected pupils with SEND who they felt would be
able to participate in the study without experiencing distress. They then
contacted the parents or carers for these pupils to ask if they would like to
participate in the study and asked for consent on behalf of the children and
young people. In total, 20 pupils, 21 parent or carers, 7 headteachers, 7
school SENCos, 21 class teachers/form tutors and 20 learning support
adults (general class or one to one) were interviewed.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
65/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
The final sample of schools had differing characteristics, but the majority
were local authority maintained. Table 1 and 2 show the breakdown of
schools across the 2 participating local authorities and characteristics of
note.
Table 1: Breakdown of participating schools across local authorities
School
Local authority 1 Local authority 2
Primary
3
2
Secondary
0
2
Table 2: Characteristics of participating schools
School
Non-
Faith
Faith
Local-
Academy
faith
(Church of
(Catholic)
authority-
(multi-
England)
maintained
academy
trust)
School
X
X
1
School
X
X
2
School
X
X
3
School
X
X
4
School
X
X
5
School
X
X
6
School
X
X
7
Local authorities and CCGs
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
66/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
As well as carrying out data collection in schools, we carried out group
interviews with the 2 local authorities that the schools were situated in.
These were completed by Ofsted researchers. In local authority 1, the local
authority group interview was with the EHC assessment team manager, the
head of service education and SEND, the director of education (early help
and SEND), the behaviour and exclusions officer and the school
improvement and quality assurance for SEND officer. For the CCG in local
authority 1, the designated clinical officer and commissioning manager were
jointly interviewed.
In local authority 2, the local authority group interview was with the director
of children's services, the assistant director for education, SEND lead and
the director of community services. For the CCG in local authority 2, the
assistant director for community and transformation and the assistant
director for commissioning and transformation were jointly interviewed.
Appendix 2: Data collection instruments
Existing literature suggests that the indicators of effective provision are:
collaborative practice across the local area (education, health and social
care)
sustained parent and child involvement in offered provision beyond the
point of diagnosis or plan creation
early and accurate identification of children and young people's needs
The topic guides for all interviews were created with the above themes in
mind.
Materials for the pupil interviews were co-produced with a SEND community
group (participants aged 12 to 25). Questions produced by the group were
included in the topic guides and suggested interview techniques were also
adopted. The consent form wording and formatting for children and young
people was also produced using the group's input.
The main areas explored in the in-depth interviews primarily concerned
individual pupil experiences; for example, their interests, what they enjoyed
and found challenging at school, the help and support they received and
what they felt might make this even better. This was supplemented by in-
depth interviews with their parents and school staff to gain insight into how
needs are identified in school, the extent of communication and co-
production with parents, the involvement of external professionals and how
any provision was subsequently evaluated.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
67/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
The interviews with the local authority and CCG groups offered a strategic
overview of SEND provision in each area, along with a discussion of the
perceived strengths and challenges.
Interview process
All school interviews were carried out by Her Majesty's Inspectors (HMI) in
pairs or trios. All inspectors had received research training. It was made
clear to schools that the research would not influence any subsequent
school inspections and that inspectors would not be evaluating school
practice or providing any informal judgements or advice during the research
process. Interviews took place in January and February 2020 (before the
COVID-19 pandemic) and were held face to face in participating schools.
One school that agreed to participate in April 2020 was not included in the
research due to the pandemic.
The research followed Ofsted's ethical research policy,
[footnote 78]
and all
participants were given an information sheet and consent form before
agreeing to take part in the research. The interviews were carried out
individually with the pupils (some of whom had a familiar adult supporting),
their parent or carer, the headteacher and the SENCo. Joint interviews with
pupils' class teacher and TA/learning support were also completed for each
child. In secondary schools, the joint interview was with the form tutor and
the pupil's key worker. One secondary staff interview was only with the form
tutor.
The focus group interviews with the local authority and CCG professionals
were carried out by 2 members of the Ofsted research team.
Interviews were recorded with participants' permission. Where permission to
record was not given, evidence notes by inspectors have been used for
analysis.
Data analysis
Most of the coding and analysis was completed using full transcriptions of
the interviews. Three interviews (2 pupils, 1 headteacher) were analysed
using evidence notes due to issues with the recordings and one interview
did not take place because the pupil did not wish to participate. The
interview with local authority 2 was partially analysed with evidence notes
as well as transcription due to an issue with the second half of the interview
recording.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
68/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
Analysis used a thematic approach and was partially inductive to ensure
that the voices of children and young people were captured as accurately
and thoroughly as possible, and partially deductive to ensure that key
themes identified in the wider literature were included in the analysis
process. The analytical coding framework was reviewed on a regular basis
by the research team for quality assurance purposes.
Limitations of the research
The findings of this report concern a small number of children with SEND
and as such are not generalisable to the wider population of those with
SEND. Although the sample is small, we can still develop hypotheses
around the factors that may influence the experiences of children with
SEND who are educated within mainstream schools. The children were
selected by their schools. We asked schools to select children who would
not find it difficult to discuss their lives with unfamiliar adults as well as being
dissimilar to one another in terms of key characteristics like gender, age and
their types of need. Making this methodological decision may have limited
the breadth of the sample. It should also be noted that the data collected
from the children was less rich than that gathered from adult participants.
There was limited evidence of social care input for both pupils who were in
care at the time of the study. However, it should be noted that this relates to
a very small number of respondents and that social care professionals
supporting these children and young people were not included in this
research.
It is important to recognise that this research was carried out early in the
spring term of 2019/20, with fieldwork completed before the COVID-19
pandemic resulted in schools being closed to most pupils. As such, the
context of the findings in this report relates to a time before the pandemic.
We recognise that because interviews were carried out by Ofsted
inspectors, there was an increased risk of social desirability bias from
participants. Inspectors carried out rigorous research training before visiting
to help mitigate for this.
Appendix 3: The case study pupils
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
69/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
Introduction
This appendix gives the experiences of the 21 young participants who were
part of this project. We developed understanding about the children and
young people's experiences through interviews with them and their
parents/carers. It is important to note that the data collection methods
selected did not fully suit the young participants. The methods did not
always engage them well and, consequently, their responses were
sometimes less detailed. Some pupils were supported during their interview
by a member of school staff.
Overview of the children and young people
The information below is from the respective schools, gathered from school
staff, parents, carers and pupils. The children have been given pseudonyms
to protect their anonymity.
School 1: primary school in local authority 1, a one-
form-entry primary school with a religious character
Ethan
Ethan is in Year 2. He is a bubbly pupil with a good sense of humour. He
often presents demanding and unpredictable behaviour, such as shouting
and refusing to work. His parents and teachers agree that he prefers
organised routines and finds change challenging. Ethan is enthusiastic
about school, loves colouring and painting and is strong in maths. Although
Ethan has friends, both his parents and teachers pointed out some
challenges he has with consistent, positive peer interaction. Ethan
experiences sensory needs: high light and noise levels are challenging for
him. His motor skills are not strong, and this reportedly affects his
independence with some aspects of personal care, such as dressing
himself.
His parents felt strongly that he should be educated in a mainstream setting.
He had received a diagnosis of autism while in nursery and his EHC plan
was put in place in Reception. His TA said he was included in everything,
but it depended on what he would 'let himself be included in', which his
parents agreed with.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
70/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
His teacher used his interest in art as part of his sensory diet. Ethan also
had ongoing subject support intervention with a TA and adapted lesson
activities that used his interests to help him participate. He had nurture
provision every day. The school supported Ethan to attend school trips and
take part in school plays. He had a familiar adult but not a one-to-one adult,
because staff did not want him to become over-reliant. Staff used timers and
visual timetables to support Ethan with his anxiety around changes in
routine.
Ava
Ava is an energetic Year 2 pupil who joined the school in the middle of Year
1. She lives with her parents and an older brother who has an ADHD
diagnosis. Ava said that she likes dancing and went to ballet club. She also
likes watching movies and listening to music. Her parent said that she
enjoys arts and crafts and playing on her iPad. She goes to Sunday school
and Rainbows. Within school, Ava said her favourite subjects are science,
mathematics and phonics. She also enjoys writing, although she did say
that she found writing hard. She does not like sport and she finds listening
difficult in school.
Ava experiences difficulties with attention and at times finds socialising
challenging, struggling to keep friends. She has dietary issues around what
she is willing to eat. She also needs supervision during mealtimes at home.
She is sensitive to textures on her skin. Ava's parent reported some angry
outbursts when routines were changed.
Ava did not have an EHC plan at the time of interview, but the school were
aiming to secure a formal needs assessment.
Ava said that she sometimes had help in lessons and other times she could
do it by herself. She talked about using a sound mat to help her in English.
A TA sometimes sat at her table. She went to small-group nurture provision
and phonics intervention every morning but was always back in the main
class in the afternoons. For mathematics, Ava went to the year group below.
She used mathematics apparatus like number squares to help herself. She
had a fidget/squeeze toy for when she felt 'mad' or was struggling to focus.
She also had a quiet space she could use when she needed to.
Jackson
Jackson is in Year 3. He is a chatty, happy child who loves sharing what he
has learned. He talked about enjoying playing with his classmates. He was
said to enjoy mathematics and English but finds tests difficult because he
said there was a lot to remember and he forgot things easily. He said that
one day, he would like to become a policeman or a 'YouTuber'. Outside of
school, he enjoys swimming, bike riding and Nerf games.
Transition into formal schooling had been a challenge for Jackson. He had
been anxious and withdrawn and took a long time to settle. His teacher said
that he found reading challenging and sometimes had poor attention.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
71/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
Jackson had chronic lung disease that he had medication for and an inhaler
that school staff could administer. His parent said that his health was poorer
in winter. Jackson did not have an EHC plan at the time of interview.
In the early years, Jackson received speech therapy. He frequently went to
hospital appointments independent of the school. In school, Jackson said
that he often got given the 'easiest work' but not always. He discussed how
he used a finger spacer and a pencil grip for his handwriting, which he
found helpful. He also used a personalised dictionary and sound mat to
support his spelling. He sometimes went out of class with a TA to practise
mathematics or English work that he found hard.
School 2: primary in local authority, a 2-form-entry
primary that is part of a multi-academy trust
Matthew
Matthew is in Year 6 and is a confident, fun pupil with a good sense of
humour. He is also a little guarded. Matthew was living with foster parents at
the time of interview, along with his 2 older sisters. Within school, Matthew
enjoys mathematics but was said to sometimes need help with reasoning
problems. He also likes art and PE. Matthew reported hating English and
said he found spelling a specific challenge. Matthew mentioned that he had
lots of school friends. In his spare time, Matthew enjoys computer games,
football and watching National Geographic programmes.
Matthew was permanently excluded from his previous primary school after
repeated temporary exclusions for aggressive behaviour towards staff. He
then attended a pupil referral unit, where he was diagnosed with ADHD. He
took medication for his ADHD to support him with school life but, during the
holidays, the foster parents reported giving him a break from this as his
behaviour at home was not an issue. Matthew had an EHC plan in place.
Matthew had had an individual reward chart for behaviour, but school staff
had withdrawn it in preparation for secondary school. Instead, they used the
class behaviour system. When Matthew first joined the school, he had one-
to-one sessions with a TA to help him catch up with his missed learning and
now he was fully included in the class. Staff supported Matthew's peer
relationships by using team building activities. Matthew also went to forest
schools as part of the school curriculum. In Years 3 and 4, Matthew had
received play therapy.
lan
lan is a sporty and creative Year 4 pupil with a flair for mathematics. He also
enjoys karate. He was described as becoming 'obsessive' when he
developed an interest, such as in Pokémon cards or computer games. His
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
72/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
parents said that lan could find new situations difficult and become quite
introverted. His parents reported 'fighting' his dislike of school, although
these concerns had diminished over time. At the time of interview, lan
enjoyed school.
When he first started school, lan developed some repeated tic-like
behaviours that his parents felt were connected to anxiety. lan had sensory
difficulties around textures and noise. He found it very difficult to manage his
emotions and could quickly become angry and engage in aggressive
behaviours such as throwing chairs. This behaviour could be triggered by
frustration with English work. lan also had a lazy eye, identified by an
optometrist. lan did not have an EHC plan, but the school were waiting for
an assessment for speech and language and had made a referral for
autistic and ADHD behaviours. His parents were waiting for a paediatric
assessment but had not been given a date.
lan was moved to a different class after his parents requested this. This
happened in the first half term of Year 4 and his behaviour since had hugely
improved. His parents had adopted a shared behaviour points system with
the school that used Pokémon cards as a reward. The school had also set
up a trading centre on the playground and said that this had helped lan to
develop his social skills.
lan also had sensory support at school. He had squeezy balls and ear
defenders that he used for events like sports day. The SENCo and his
parents had planned for him to have a separate workstation. He had
reading overlays and had his work printed on green paper following
recommendations from the optometrist. lan previously had play therapy
between Years 1 and 2 to help with the transition.
Amelia
Amelia, a Reception pupil, was described by her parent as an outgoing
'tough little cookie'. She enjoys reading, painting, role play, toy cars and
Fireman Sam. She is helpful, caring, responsible and is 'a real character
with a wicked sense of humour'. The class TA said that Amelia loved helping
others and doing jobs in the classroom like the register or handing out book
bags. She also likes to help other children if they were upset or hurt
themselves. Amelia attended a multi-sports club as well as yoga sessions.
Amelia had a vascular tumour with lymphoedema, and this had affected her
health. As a baby, she underwent numerous blood transfusions and
chemotherapy and frequent hospital stays limited the time she could spend
in early years settings. Her physical development and fine motor skills were
below age-related expectations and she struggled with writing. She had also
struggled with toileting until her parent found that a timer was effective,
which the school then started using. Amelia did not have an EHC plan at the
time of interview, but the SENCo at her school was in the process of
gathering evidence towards a possible referral for assessment.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
73/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
Amelia had a twin sister and the school talked about how the parent had
asked for them to be in separate classes to help Amelia develop more
independence. This had been successful, and Amelia had stopped focusing
on adults and had become more self-sufficient. Amelia had extra hours of
support with a TA for phonics and motor skill activities. Staff also supported
Amelia by using a timer to help her focus on tasks. She had support in PE
with gross motor skills.
When Amelia moved from nursery to reception the school supported the
transition by giving her additional time out of class in their provision for 2-
year-olds to help her catch up on early years experiences she missed when
she was young. She had support from an external speech and language
team at the time of the study.
School 3: primary in local authority 1, a 2-form-entry
primary that is part of a multi-academy trust
Jordan
Jordan is a Year 4 pupil described by his parents as charismatic and chatty.
He is positive, determined and happy. He lives with his parents and brother.
He is very confident and enjoys sharing his ideas with others. School staff
described him as very popular with his peers. Outside of school, he enjoys
music and horse riding. He also enjoys taking part in an annual sports day
for children with disabilities, which he has received medals for.
Jordan was born prematurely and had a brain haemorrhage early in life. He
was diagnosed with cerebral palsy when he was 18 months old. He often
used a wheelchair or walker for support, but his mobility had improved
slightly since having an operation on his back. School staff reported good
levels of physical activity on the playground. His teacher reported that
although he had strong ideas for writing, he did struggle with presenting
ideas. He also found mathematics challenging. At the time of interview, he
was working a little below age-related expectation. Jordan had an EHC
plan, which was put in place after his parent applied when he was in
Nursery.
Jordan had a class TA that helped him with his wheelchair and moving
between classes/areas in the school as well as providing learning support.
School staff said that he had to have support from 2 adults with toileting. A
different TA helped him with lunch times and outside on the playground, for
example by carrying his lunch tray while he was in his wheelchair. He
attended school trips but staff talked about needing to organise separate
transport for him, such as a taxi. Jordan talked about having visits from 2
physiotherapists a few times a year but also had private physiotherapy in
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
74/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
addition to this. His class TA did exercises with him recommended by
occupational therapy.
Ryan
Ryan is described as a friendly, sociable Year 5 pupil. He has an older
sister, enjoys playing with his dog and spends his spare time playing tennis
and computer games. He said he loved travelling and his dream at the time
of interview was to become a pilot. Ryan loved mathematics, PE and
drawing and asked lots of questions in lessons to further his learning. He
was able to talk enthusiastically about what he had learned in science,
history and geography and he said he enjoyed school. He said he made
friends easily and liked to attend a youth group each week to socialise and
play games. His confidence with his learning is growing.
His parents and school staff described sensory processing issues emerging
when Ryan was in Nursery. These were mainly around heat and noise.
When Ryan was in lower key stage 2, he and his parent saw an
occupational therapist, who agreed that he had 'mild to moderate' sensory
processing challenges.
Ryan sometimes struggled to manage his emotions and would have a
'meltdown'. He was described as working at age-related expectations for
mathematics but not English, which he did not enjoy. He said that writing
made his hand hurt. Ryan did not have an EHC plan at the time of interview.
Ryan talked about having help with English, especially spelling, from the
class TA. It was reported that he was also well supported by his peers. He
talked about being able to use the IT suite as a quiet space when he
needed to, for example, when it became too noisy for him in class. School
staff talked about he was now able to self-regulate his emotions and explain
what had upset him. Staff helped Ryan manage his sensory difficulties with
heat by making sure he sat on the edge of the carpet or near a window.
They had also encouraged him to regulate himself, for example, to get up
and go and splash his face with water if he needed to.
Nathan
Nathan was described as an outgoing, caring Year 6 pupil, at ease with his
peers. At the time of interview, he lived with his family, including an adult
sister who was a wheelchair user and a pet dog. He acts as a playground
helper in school, assisting others when needed. He has a passion for
basketball and wants to be a basketball player when he grows up. He also
generally enjoys his schoolwork, in particular mathematics. He likes drawing
and playing computer games. At times, his teachers said he could be
distracted during lessons but that he loved school.
After falling ill with a bug in Year 3, Nathan developed a significant phobia of
illness, which his parent identified as emetophobia. This phobia caused a
fixation with illness that was debilitating for most of that year. His parent
talked about him having panic attacks and 'freezing' when he became too
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send.
75/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
anxious. After Nathan expressed thoughts of self-harm, he received support
from CAMHS, which had a positive impact. In Year 6, Nathan was described
as still having occasional flare-ups but that he had made good progress
managing his phobia. His phobia had resulted in some absence from school
and being 'unable to function at his full potential' academically. Nathan also
talked about how he sometimes got distracted in class. Nathan did not have
an EHC plan at the time of interview.
When he was in Year 3, he saw CAMHS workers once a week. In Year 6,
Nathan talked about getting help from the class TA when he asked for it and
that he had lots of help for spelling, which he had recently got better at. At
school, he had a role as a playground buddy, helping to resolve issues
between other children, which he enjoyed. He talked about having 'strategy
cards' that helped him in Year 3 by providing him with reassurance that he'd
be OK. His parents said that the school gave him a brave book to record
achievements in and boost his confidence, which had worked really well.
School staff have been careful to avoid assessment-related pressure on
Nathan to make sure they did not 'undo' his progress. His teacher talked
about how they supported Nathan's anxiety around transition to Year 6 by
talking him through the expectations and routines 'right down to the little
things like where his books went'.
School 4: primary in local authority 2, a one-form-entry
primary school with a religious character
Matteo
Matteo is a Year 4 pupil who is bright and has a good sense of humour. He
loves mathematics and computing and finds them easy. He also enjoys
science and art. Matteo said that he had a lot of friends to enjoy playtime
with. He lives with his parents and younger sister and loves spending time
at home, often helping out with chores. Matteo likes to keep a teddy close
by but does not take him out to breaktimes at school. He is on the school
council. Outside of school, he enjoys watching comedy, collecting rocks and
playing piano and is a member of a jiu-jitsu club. He also enjoys computer
games, technology and reading. His aspiration is to study rocks.
Matteo was already diagnosed with autism and ADHD and had an EHC plan
at the time of the study. He was taking a low dosage of medication for his
ADHD. His parents described him as having 'high functioning' autism.
Matteo was aware of his diagnosis. Parents and school staff acknowledged
that, at times, Matteo exhibited some challenging behaviour and could
struggle to stay focused. His mood could be unpredictable, swinging from
happiness to sadness or anger. School staff said he found working in
groups and thinking of others difficult. The physical elements of handwriting
hurt Matteo's hand if he did it for too long and he struggled choosing the
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
76/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
appropriate style and genre for writing tasks. His parents also mentioned
that Matteo sometimes put things in his mouth to taste them and they
worried he would do this with something dangerous or unsanitary. Matteo
talked about struggling to finish his lunches and his parent talked about this
being a long-term issue which they felt was connected to sensory needs
around noise in the lunch hall.
Matteo had 2 one-to-one TAs who alternated between mornings and
afternoons. He had his own workstation in the classroom where he
completed lesson tasks. One of his TAs was always outside with him at
playtimes and talked about intervening to support Matteo's social skills
where needed. If there was an incident with behaviour, the parent came in
to discuss it with staff rather than Matteo being put in the behaviour book.
Matteo said that he had sensory breaks, which he enjoyed, as well as a
feelings check-in and a 'now and next' timetable. He had the option to use
ear defenders when he felt he needed them.
Jakob
Jakob is a multi-lingual pupil in Reception. He was described as bright,
independent and complex. His parent said that he could be calm and helpful
at home. He likes trains and cars and loves building with LEGO. His TA said
he was very good at building with construction materials. Jakob is confident
about his learning and his parent felt that he was calmer now he was
starting to catch up academically with his classmates.
Jakob had presented with very challenging behaviour. He struggled to sit
still and found transition points during the school day challenging. Staff
talked about how he refused to follow rules or instructions. Jakob also
struggled to sit still. The school was waiting for an assessment of needs at
the time of the study and they felt he had sensory needs as well as
behavioural. His teacher described highly disruptive behaviour when he first
joined the school, including spitting, swearing and hitting TAs, which they
felt had a negative impact on staff well-being. Jakob said that 'nobody wants
to play with me if I'm bad' and his teacher confirmed he only had 2 friends
that he played with. Jakob did not have an EHC plan at the time of the
interview.
Jakob said he received stickers for 'being good'. He had several TAs who
changed over throughout the day who the class teacher described as being
'velcro'd to him' because he was 'too much for any one person'. He was
accompanied for most activities by a one-to-one TA. One of the TAs talked
about getting him ready in advance for transition points such as home time.
The school had early years funding in place for Jakob, which they used to
fund his one-to-one TAs. His TAs have supported him to take part in small-
group work, which he now participates in for phonics and art. His parents
had a sticker chart at school that matched the one Jakob had in school and
rewarded him when he got 3 stamps. He had a 'now and next' timetable and
a timer for when he needed to sit in his chair.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
77/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
Aaron
Aaron is a happy, bubbly, loving Year 1 pupil who can be stubborn and have
mood swings. His parent said he was helpful and affectionate around the
house. He finds his speech difficulties frustrating, but this does not stop him
wanting to communicate. His mother described him as a 'chatterbox'. He
lives with his parents and slightly older brother, who he does not always get
on well with. In school, he loves mathematics, which his TA said was a
strength. He also enjoys art, history, PE (particularly dance) and playing
instruments in music lessons. He is sociable, has lots of friends and is often
the centre of attention. At home, he enjoys playing computer games with his
dad, imaginative play and cooking.
Aaron had severe speech and language needs due to a narrow larynx and
difficulties with manipulating his tongue and mouth. His parents reported
that he only started speaking in sentences in the year he started school.
When he was younger, he had had sleep apnoea and glue ear as well as
having his adenoids and tonsils removed. At the end of Reception, he had
not reached the 'good level of development [footnote 79] in phonics, speaking,
reading or writing. In Year 1, English was still a challenge and Aaron found
writing and reading difficult. His teacher said that he could be hard to
motivate and his parent said he was very behind but doing well for him. His
TA felt that Aaron did not realise that his words were 'not coming out' and
got frustrated when he was not understood. Aaron did not have an EHC
plan at the time of interview.
Aaron was having speech and language sessions in school at the time of
the study, but the TA said that the therapist was struggling with him and that
Aaron was not making much progress. The TA also did one-to-one phonics
sessions with him every day using guidance from speech and language, but
they could not 'push him too much' because he could quickly lose
motivation. The teacher said that, most of the time, Aaron was in a smaller
table group for lessons and the TA always sat with his table when they were
in the class. His parent said that, at home, Aaron sometimes used signs to
communicate.
School 5: primary in local authority 2, a one-form-entry
school with a religious character
Thomas
Thomas is in Year 5 and is a confident pupil who wants to learn. While being
a little playful and keen to seek attention, his TA confirmed he was 'not a
child who disrupts the class'. Mathematics is Thomas's favourite subject and
staff agreed it was his strength. He also likes science and topic lessons.
Thomas said that he found English hard, particularly writing and using
punctuation correctly. He said that remembering what to do for different
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
78/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND GOV.UK
genres was also tricky. His teacher echoed this but said that they were not
concerned about his academic attainment. Social issues were not reported.
Outside of school, Thomas enjoys karate and he also attends 2 in-school
clubs. He enjoys singing and playing guitar and has sung in assembly. He
said he would like to become a manager in a pet shop. Thomas was born
prematurely, and his parent reported that he experienced challenges with
walking and speaking during his early years. He found changes to routine
difficult and had highly specific preferences with clothing. His family said
they needed to support him with some elements of personal care and also
at mealtimes, with family members pouring drinks for him and cutting up his
food.
Thomas had an EHC plan, which he received when he was in Reception
following an autism diagnosis when he was in Nursery. He was also
reported to have weak motor skills. When he was in Nursery, a speech
therapist introduced the family to PECS (Picture Exchange Communication
System) to support him but, at time of interview, Thomas was described as
no longer needing this method. Current support centred on Thomas having
one-to-one support from a TA and being able to stick to a set routine,
particularly in the mornings. The school used a daily planner to
communicate what has happened in Thomas's day to his family.
Connor
Connor is a caring, cheeky, well-behaved and hard-working Year 2 pupil
who likes to get things correct. He is also quiet, sensitive and sometimes
nervous. He is the youngest of 3 siblings. He has a small group of friends at
school and is a member of the school choir. At home, he enjoys playing with
his iPad, toy cars and monkeys. In school, he likes PE and also
mathematics, although he admitted finding the latter quite difficult. He is a
talented artist and was keen to show his sketch book when he was
interviewed. Connor said he would like to work in a pet shop when older.
Connor's parent described first becoming aware that he might need support
as a result of Connor's aversion to certain types of food, which restricted his
dietary intake: 'all he would eat was Haribo'. Connor's diet was still an area
of concern at the time of interview. His teacher suggested that this might be
affecting his overall health.
Connor reported that he found English difficult, both reading and writing. He
especially disliked reading and his parent talked about having to take turns
reading a page to encourage him. His parent described Connor has having
low self-confidence, and that he had cried going into school just before the
interview, which his parent attributed to anxiety. Connor's TA mentioned
that, although he had made progress in phonics, he was still behind age-
related expectations.
After initial suggestions of autism, when Connor was 5, his parent was told
by CAMHS that he had a sensory processing disorder. He also had a fear of
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
79/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
food and smells and continued to experience some dietary difficulties. His
parent reported some challenging outbursts at home and difficulty in
supporting him to feel calm. Connor did not have an EHC plan at the time of
interview. His school were not fully aware of all the aspects of the contact
between his parents and CAMHS. Connor's parent was also not aware that
the school SENCo was in the process of developing a written support plan
for him.
Harper
Harper is a lively, funny and helpful Year 3 pupil who gets on well with his
peers. He lives with his parents and 3 siblings. His parents reported
behaviour problems at home and felt he craved attention. Outside school,
Harper had been part of a karate club and is interested in playing football.
He does not attend school clubs. Harper talked about enjoying playing
outside on the trampoline, using games on his phone and watching TV. He
also said he liked playing with toys and 'daydreaming'.
Harper is happy about going to school and particularly enjoys art.
Mathematics, computing and reading are more challenging for him,
although, during the interview, he said that he felt he was improving.
Harper's teacher reported that he was working significantly below age-
related expectation but enjoyed getting involved in all subjects. With
reading, Harper's teacher said that Harper struggles to form letters properly
and apply sounds, which he has support for. His teacher was not sure
whether or not Harper had passed his phonics check.
Harper did not have an EHC plan at the time of interview and there had
been no involvement from external agencies. His parent said she was only
aware that he was 'a little bit behind'. His parent was unaware that Harper
was on the SEND support register at his school, having only discovered it
when she was asked to give consent to participate in this research. His
parent suggested that Harper's needs mostly manifested as behavioural
difficulties at home and were not 'anything that needs to be labelled for
because he can clearly control it'.
School 6: secondary in local authority 2, a slightly
larger-than-average secondary comprehensive
Robert
Robert, a Year 7 pupil, is a happy, and proactive pupil who contributes in
lessons. He was said to have a positive attitude to learning. Robert is
looked after, having been in foster care for 3 years. He has several siblings,
but they do not all live together. Robert was said to enjoy school. He arrives
early and he talked about having lots of friends. He likes art, design and
technology, food technology and enjoys playing football. Outside of school,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
80/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
Robert enjoys holidays, Scouts, cooking, gardening and board games.
Robert said that he would like to become an IT technician and described,
during his interview, how he had helped his teacher fix a computer.
Robert had gaps in learning due to long absences from school. He had
attended 5 or 6 schools in his lifetime. His foster parent felt that the
curriculum was too demanding for Robert as he did not have all of the
knowledge needed to learn more advanced topics. One of Robert's main
areas of need was English, specifically reading, in which he was
significantly behind age-related expectations. His foster parent said they
struggled to encourage him to read at home. They also said that when they
first met Robert, he could not write his own name. Robert was aware he
was not a strong reader and said he was 'not getting good scores'. He felt
he was not improving, although the school SENCo felt he was making slow
but steady progress. Robert had an EHC plan at the time of interview. This
had been put in place while he was with his foster parent, who felt that the
support Robert received once the application was successful had improved.
Robert came in early 3 days a week to have one-to-one spelling
intervention. He felt that this helped him. He also had regular reading
interventions and the SENCo had started looking at a mathematics recovery
programme for him. Robert received counselling in school. Robert said that
he felt he was helped in school and that people always '[came] over to help'
if he asked. He had one-to-one TA support in core subjects. Robert talked
about missing some non-core lessons to do extra English and mathematics
work. He had extra time for tests.
Maria
Maria is a friendly, well-behaved, sometimes quiet, sometimes chatty Year 7
pupil. She lives with her family, including 2 sisters, and she has been
brought up to be bilingual. She had spent a lot of time travelling in her
earlier life, but her family were now settled in England. Maria reportedly
likes school. Her favourite pastime is reading. She also likes history, PE,
music and Spanish but finds mathematics, science and geography more
challenging. School staff described a positive attitude, good behaviour and
readiness to learn, although at the time of interview she had missed some
homework deadlines, particularly in mathematics. Outside school, she
enjoys bike riding and playing tennis. She is musical and plays the flute as a
hobby. She was said to get on well with her peers and enjoys spending time
with friends.
Maria's identified needs stemmed from previous hearing loss, which her
parent said had started to have an impact on her learning and development
when she was 4. Maria had had operations to improve her hearing, which
had been successful, but her parent felt the learning she had missed
caused her to fall behind her peers, particularly in terms of her speech. At
the time of interview, Maria was said not to speak. However, her parent felt
she was talking more than previously, and Maria engaged well with the
research interview. Staff felt that Maria had learning needs rather than a
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
81/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
language need, because Maria's speech was reported to be better than her
written work. School staff also reported that she had problems with
cognition, working memory and language comprehension. Maria's attention
could wander.
Maria did not have an EHC plan at the time of interview. She received
support from the school in terms of one-to-one support for reading and had
TA support in all core subjects. Maria's TA talked about modelling work for
her in English and providing encouragement and reassurance in
mathematics. Her form tutor described breaking material into chunks and
using simple language to help Maria learn. She also received access
arrangements for exams. Maria had some additional reading and spelling
interventions that she was taken out of lessons for. At the time of the study,
Maria was about to start a Talking Partners intervention to help develop her
communication.
Faizan
Faizan is a quiet, independent, motivated and well-behaved Year 10 pupil.
He was born prematurely in Pakistan and had moved to England very early
in his life. He lives with his parents and younger brother. School staff agreed
he was dedicated and focused and had a positive attitude to learning. He
does not struggle within any area of the curriculum. He excels in science.
He has a good group of friends and his form teacher reported he had
positive relationships with his peers. Faizan said he would like to go to
college. In his spare time, Faizan enjoys drama, art and playing on his
computer.
After an audiology assessment, Faizan was confirmed to have bilateral high
frequency hearing loss. His parent said he could not hear high-pitched
sounds. His SENCo suggested Faizan also had difficulty hearing soft
noises. He wore hearing aids at school and the SENCo suggested this had
helped his hearing significantly. His form teacher reported that he spoke
with a faint slur and mentioned that Faizan did not always maintain eye
contact. Faizan also had an asymptomatic enzyme deficiency, but this did
not affect his school life. At the time of the research, he wore hearing aids at
school but not routinely at home, in accordance with doctors' advice, to
reduce the risk of ear infections.
Faizan did not have an EHC plan at the time of interview. In the past, Faizan
had received support from speech and language therapy but he had been
discharged. He had also previously used a Roger Pen for hearing support,
but he was not using one at the time of interview. External health
professionals periodically assessed Faizan in school to make sure his
hearing aids were working effectively. In terms of in-school support, his form
tutor made sure he sat near the front and double checked his understanding
with him regularly. They also said direct communication was important for
Faizan. The SENCo agreed that Faizan did not need much support with his
learning but said that a sensory support worker worked with him. This was
to cover vocabulary gaps resulting from hearing difficulties, in preparation
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
82/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
for GCSEs. The sensory support worker also worked with Faizan around
any additional comprehension issues raised by school staff. Faizan felt that
he got the same level of help as everyone else and that he was doing well
at school.
School 7: secondary in local authority 2, a smaller-
than-average secondary comprehensive
Isaac
Isaac is an affectionate, sometimes chatty, sometimes shy Year 10 pupil.
His teacher described him as lovable and bubbly and he was well-liked by
his peers. His friends are mainly girls attending other schools. He lives with
his parents and has no siblings. Isaac was said to be independent but, at
times, is also happy to allow others to do things for him. He enjoys running
and is a member of a local athletics club. At the time of interview, he played
the piano and enjoyed reading Horrid Henry. Gaming and shopping for
clothes are also hobbies. Within school, he enjoys practical subjects,
particularly food technology and media. He had taken part in a number of
school stage productions and wants to study drama in college. His parents
suggested a job in the food industry would also fit his strengths.
Isaac was diagnosed with a genetic disability and dyspraxia, as well as
behavioural and academic needs. He also experienced some anxiety and
had low muscle tone. He had been prescribed medication to aid his sleep
when he was 5, which he was still taking. His parents said they were
concerned about his social relationship development. Isaacs's behaviour
was described as unpredictable, challenging and disruptive at times both at
home and at school. He had outbursts of aggression. However, school staff
said that, as he had matured, he had become more able to regulate his
emotions, for example, by learning how to 'take 5 minutes'. Isaac was
struggling with science and mathematics and was following an entry level
and functional skills pathway to his Year 11 qualifications. He found
retaining information very challenging. Isaac has an EHC plan that was put
in place when he was 5. His genetic condition and dyspraxia were not
identified until he was around 8.
Isaac talked about speaking to school staff about what he found challenging
and what he enjoyed in school. He said he got the chance to talk about
what he needs. Isaac was given differentiated homework tasks to build up
his confidence. Isaac independently went to lessons and lunch but knew
where to find his TA if he needed them. He had one-to-one TA support
during all lessons and breaktimes. In class, he often worked in small
groups. His worksheets are made bigger for him to help engagement. Isaac
had a room he could go to when he needed a time out, which he said made
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
83/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
him feel relaxed. He still carried out learning activities while he was there.
Outside of school, Isaac saw a private child psychologist.
Cameron
Cameron is a quiet, happy and caring Year 11 pupil. He was said to enjoy
school, particularly technology, mathematics and art, and is attentive and
hard-working. He enjoys surfing, horse-riding, kayaking and walking with his
dogs. He also likes to cook and said he would like to pursue a career in the
food industry. Cameron lives with his mother and younger brother. His
parent said he really wanted to achieve and was generally hard-working and
quiet. His TA also said he was eager to please. Through the school, he had
taken part in the Duke of Edinburgh award as well as sports events.
When he was in primary school, Cameron's father had died. Following this
bereavement, Cameron temporarily stopped speaking and produced very
little work. He was diagnosed with dyspraxia and hypermobility in primary
school. When he started secondary school, he struggled with the transition
and was an elective mute for a time. However, he said he now felt more
confident and could speak. At the time of interview, he was experiencing
new issues with trembling hands and wrists and found working with different
members of staff challenging due to their different approaches. He also has
difficulties with processing information. Writing is especially difficult for him
and this impacts his achievement across the curriculum. The school had
applied for an EHC plan but this had been denied. However, Cameron had
been allocated 'exceptional funding' so that the school could support his
needs.
Cameron received extra time for any exams and had dropped a subject
(geography) that he was particularly struggling with to help support his other
learning. He had one-to-one support in mathematics and English lessons
and 3 hours out of class each week for intervention sessions. These could
be for revision, coursework, additional English or catch-up work, for
example. Cameron talked about his TA scribing for him in lessons. Staff also
talked about supporting him with peer interaction through group activities
and pre-warning Cameron about questions to allow extra thinking time.
Every morning, Cameron had a 'coaching session' with his form teacher,
where he discussed his current learning and how he was feeling.
Madison
Madison is a sensitive, caring, polite, hard-working and enthusiastic Year 8
pupil. She is also very quiet and lacks confidence. Madison's parent said
that she had always been quiet but was happy to go to school. School staff
reported that she was happy with peers and had one particular friend who
she was very close to. Madison was said to be well organised and to have a
mature attitude. She enjoys geography, history, art and drama. Outside of
school, she likes drawing, cooking and taking part in charity work with her
family. She also loves animals and has a wide range of pets at home that
she cares for. Madison said that she would like to become a nurse or a
midwife.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
84/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
Mathematics was a significant challenge for Madison. Dyscalculia had been
mentioned but no formal assessment had been made as this was not part of
the local authority's services. School staff said that processing and
comprehension had now been formally identified as an area of need.
Although Madison's English teacher reported good progress, Madison
suggested she was struggling in English. Madison said that she sometimes
got 'worked up' because she found work across lessons challenging and
reported feeling angry. She wanted to get better at school but said that she
struggled in a range of subjects when there were a lot of questions to
process and content to understand. School staff reported that she often
panicked in science and needed a lot of repetition. At the time of interview,
there had been no formal identification of need. Madison did not have an
EHC plan.
When Madison first started at the school, she had experienced bullying,
which had been dealt with after she moved class and received pastoral
support. This support had been one-to-one and daily initially. She had also
received counselling at school. She no longer needed to use these services
at the time of the study. Madison used a reading pen and headphones to
help her. Her parent mentioned that the school had started trialling one-to-
one reading comprehension sessions with her in the mornings before
school. She also went to subject intervention groups for mathematics and
comprehension with a TA every week. Madison also took part in Talking
Partners intervention for social skills and communication, which she said
she really enjoyed. In mathematics, Madison had a lot of scaffolding with
differentiated tasks, modelled answers, TA support, practice questions to
take home and revision cards. She attended homework club, where she had
support from a TA. Madison had a place to go when she was angry, but she
said she did not need to use it very often.
1. 'National statistics: special educational needs in England: January 2020'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/special-educational-needs-in-england-
january-2020), Department for Education, 2020.
We will use the term 'SEND' (special educational needs and/or
disabilities) in this document except for where participants or literature
have used 'SEN' (special educational needs).
2. 'National statistics: special educational needs in England: January 2016'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/special-educational-needs-in-england-
january-2016), Department for Education, 2016; 'National statistics: special
educational needs in England: January 2020'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/special-educational-needs-in-england-
january-2020), Department for Education, 2020.
3. 'National statistics: special educational needs in England: January 2020'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/special-educational-needs-in-england-
january-2020), Department for Education, 2020.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
85/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
4. For example, Y Anders, P Sammons, B Taggart, K Sylva, E Melhuish and
I Siraj-Blatchford, 'The influence of child, family, home factors and pre-
school education on the identification of special educational needs at age
10', in 'British Educational Research Journal', Volume 37, Issue 3, 2011,
pages 421 to 441; S Ellis and J Tod, 'Identification of SEN: is consistency
a realistic or worthy aim?', in 'Support for Learning', Volume 27, Issue 2,
2012, pages 59 to 66; S McCoy, J Banks and M Shevlin, 'School matters:
how context influences the identification of different types of special
education needs', in 'Irish Educational Studies', Volume 31, Issue 2,
2012, pages 119 to 138; 'The special educational needs and disability
review: a statement is not enough'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/special-educational-needs-and-
disability-review), Ofsted, September 2010; J Hutchinson, 'Identifying
pupils with special educational needs and disabilities', Education Policy
Institute and Nuffield Foundation, March 2021; House of Commons
Education Select Committee (2019)
(https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201920/cmselect/cmeduc/20/2002.htm).
5. For example, 'Local area SEND inspections: one year on'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/local-area-send-inspections-one-
year-on), Ofsted and Care Quality Commission, October 2017;
'Ofsted Annual Report 2019/20: education, children's services and skills'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ofsted-annual-report-201920-
education-childrens-services-and-skils), Ofsted, December 2020; 'Support
for pupils with special educational needs and disabilities in England'
(https://www.nao.org.uk/report/support-for-pupils-with-special-educational-needs-
and-disabilities/), National Audit Office, September 2019; House of
Commons Education Select Committee (2019)
(https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201920/cmselect/cmeduc/20/2002.htm).
6. Co-production is a way of working that brings together pupils, parents or
carers and education, health and care services into partnership when
making decisions about how best to support a pupil. The aim of co-
production is to involve pupils, parents and carers in the fullest possible
way. When asked about their school's 'school information report' about
provision for SEND, many parents and carers in the sample were not
aware of it.
7. Multi-agency services include education, health and care providers (that
may provide assessments, provision input and expertise for EHC plans)
or in-school support for pupils with SEND.
8. 'National statistics: special educational needs in England: January 2020'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/special-educational-needs-in-england-
january-2020), Department for Education, 2020.
9. 'Special educational needs and disability: code of practice: 0-25 years'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-code-of-practice-0-to-25),
Department for Education and Department of Health and Social Care,
June 2014; page 15.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
86/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
10. 'Special educational needs and disability: code of practice: 0-25 years'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-code-of-practice-0-to-25),
Department for Education and Department of Health and Social Care,
June 2014.
11. 'Special educational needs and disability: code of practice: 0-25 years'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-code-of-practice-0-to-25),
Department for Education and Department of Health and Social Care,
June 2014.
12. 'Definition of disability under the Equality Act 2010'
(https://www.gov.uk/definition-of-disability-under-equality-act-2010).
13. The Equality Act 2010 (https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/15/contents)
sets out that providers must make 'reasonable adjustments' so that
disabled children and young people are not at a substantial disadvantage
compared with their peers. The SEND code of practice states that this
may include adjustments to procedures, criteria and practices and the
provision of auxiliary aids and services.
14. For example, Y Anders, P Sammons, B Taggart, K Sylva, E Melhuish and
I Siraj-Blatchford, 'The influence of child, family, home factors and pre-
school education on the identification of special educational needs at age
10', in 'British Educational Research Journal', Volume 37, Issue 3, 2011,
pages 421 to 441; S Ellis and J Tod, 'Identification of SEN: is consistency
a realistic or worthy aim?', in 'Support for Learning', Volume 27, Issue 2,
2012, pages 59 to 66; S McCoy, J Banks and M Shevlin, 'School matters:
how context influences the identification of different types of special
education needs', in 'Irish Educational Studies', Volume 31, Issue 2,
2012, pages 119 to 138; 'The special educational needs and disability
review: a statement is not enough'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/special-educational-needs-and-
disability-review), Ofsted, September 2010; J Hutchinson, 'Identifying
pupils with special educational needs and disabilities', Education Policy
Institute and Nuffield Foundation (https://epi.org.uk/publications-and-
research/identifying-send/), March 2021.
15. H Algraigray and C Boyle, 'The SEN label and its effect on special
education', in 'Educational and Child Psychology', Volume 34, Issue 4,
2017, pages 70 to 81; F Lauchlan and C Boyle, 'Labeling and inclusive
education', in 'Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Education', Oxford
University Press, 2020.
16. F Lauchlan and C Boyle, 'Labeling and inclusive education', in 'Oxford
Research Encyclopedia of Education', Oxford University Press, 2020.
17. 'National statistics: special educational needs in England: January 2016'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/special-educational-needs-in-england-
january-2016), Department for Education, 2016; 'National statistics: special
educational needs in England: January 2020'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/special-educational-needs-in-england-
january-2020), Department for Education, 2020.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
87/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
18. 'National statistics: special educational needs in England: January 2020'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/special-educational-needs-in-england-
january-2020), Department for Education, 2020.
19. The Children and Families Act 2014
(https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2014/6/contents/enacted).
20. B Lamb, 'Lamb Inquiry - special education needs and parental
confidence'
(https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130320215632/https:/www.educati
on.gov.uk/publications/standard/publicationDetail/Page1/DCSF-01143-2009),
Department for Education, December 2009.
21. This included the introduction of the Equality Act 2010 and a revised
SEND code of practice (2014), as well as multiple reviews into care and
provision (see: 'The special educational needs and disability review: a
statement is not enough' (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/special-
educational-needs-and-disability-revievw), Ofsted, September 2010; C
Lenehan, 'These are our children'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/lenehan-review-into-care-of-
children-with-learning-disabilites), Council for Disabled Children and
Department of Health and Social Care, January 2017; D Rochford, 'The
Rochford Review: review of assessment for pupils working below the
standard of national curriculum tests'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/rochford-review-final-report),
Standards and Testing Agency, October 2016. Area SEND inspections of
local areas by Ofsted and the CQC were also introduced ('Local area
SEND inspections: one year on'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/local-area-send-inspections-one-
year-on), Ofsted and Care Quality Commission, October 2017).
22. 'Support for pupils with special educational needs and disabilities in
England' https://%20www.nao.org.uk/report/support-for-pupils-with-special-
educational-needs-and-disabilities/), National Audit Office, September 2019.
23. Before September 2014, a statement of SEN was the document which
set out the pupil's need and the extra help they should receive.
24. 'Education, health and care plans: England, 2020' (https://explore-
education-statistics.service.gov.uk/find-statistics/education-health-and-care
plans), Department for Education, May 2020.
25. 'National statistics: special educational needs in England: January 2020'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/special-educational-needs-in-england-
january-2020), Department for Education, 2020.
26. 'National statistics: special educational needs in England: January 2020'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/special-educational-needs-in-england-
january-2020), Department for Education, 2020.
27. 'Education, health and care plans: England, 2020' (https://explore-
education-statistics.service.gov.uk/find-statistics/education-health-and-care-
plans), Department for Education, May 2020.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
88/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
28. For example, 'Ofsted Annual Report 2019/20: education, children's
services and skills' (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ofsted-annual-
report-201920-education-childrens-services-and-skills), Ofsted, December
2020; B Lamb, 'Lamb Inquiry - special education needs and parental
confidence'
(https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130320215632/https://www.educati
on.gov.uk/publications/standard/publicationDetail/Page1/DCSF-01143-2009),
Department for Education, December 2009; S Parsons and L Platt, 'The
early academic progress of children with special educational needs', in
'British Educational Research Journal', Volume 43, Issue 3, 2017, pages
466 to 485.
29. 'HMCI's commentary: recent primary and secondary curriculum research'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/hmcis-commentary-october-2017),
Ofsted, October 2017.
30. 'Special educational needs and disabilities'
(https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201920/cmselect/cmeduc/20/2002.htm),
House of Commons Education Committee, October 2019.
31. This includes staff training, access to specialist skill support and
commissioning of services by local authorities, for example.
32. 'Support for pupils with special educational needs and disabilities in
England' https://%20www.nao.org.uk/report/support-for-pupils-with-special-
educational-needs-and-disabilities/), National Audit Office, September 2019.
33. 'Ofsted Annual Report 2019/20: education, children's services and skills'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ofsted-annual-report-201920-
education-childrens-services-and-skills), Ofsted, December 2020.
34. 'Local area SEND inspections: one year on'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/local-area-send-inspections-one-
year-on), Ofsted and Care Quality Commission, October 2017.
35. 'Ofsted Annual Report 2019/20: education, children's services and skills'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ofsted-annual-report-201920-
education-childrens-services-and-skills), Ofsted, December 2020.
36. The design of pupil interviews was supported by a SEND community
group of young people.
37. T Booth and M Ainscow, 'Index for inclusion: developing learning and
participation in schools', 3rd edition, Centre for Studies in Inclusive
Education, 2011.
38. M Ainscow, A Dyson and S Weiner, 'From exclusion to inclusion: ways of
responding in schools to students with special educational needs
(https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED546818), Centre for British Teachers Education
Trust, 2013.
39. Aaron's communication difficulties prevented him from expressing himself
during the interview for this study. His TA was present but was unable to
translate what Aaron was saying.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
89/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
40. The external specialist from the local authority SEND team who was
providing weekly support to Faizan was referred to by the SENCo as a
'sensory support' key worker. In the interviews, participants did not
specifically mention that a Teacher of the Deaf was involved in Faizan's
support.
41. Autism, here referred to as autism spectrum disorder.
42. Research has shown that instruction from TAs can limit pupils' progress
and understanding, and reduce autonomy and independence. This can
lead to some pupils developing 'learned helplessness'. See, for example,
J Sharples, R Webster and P Blatchford, 'Making the best use of teaching
assistants: guidance report', 2nd edition, Education Endowment Fund,
2018.
43. Many of the pupils were only able to identify some of the help they
received. This often related to the support provided by a TA - the visible
form of support. Some pupils also mentioned physical resources, such as
sound mats, that helped their learning, but generally they were unable to
describe the wider planning and resources that their parents and school
staff mentioned.
44. The Equality Act 2010 sets out that providers must make 'reasonable
adjustments' so that disabled children and young people are not at a
substantial disadvantage compared with their peers. The SEND code of
practice states that this may include adjustments to procedures, criteria
and practices and the provision of auxiliary aids and services.
45. B Lamb, 'Lamb Inquiry - special education needs and parental
confidence'
(https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130320215632/https://www.educati
on.gov.uk/publications/standard/publicationDetailPage1/DCSF-01143-2009),
Department for Education, December 2009.
46. 'The deployment and impact of support staff (DISS) project'
(http://maximisingtas.co.uk/research/the-diss-project.php) Maximising the
Impact of Teaching Assistants, 2009.
47. J Sharples, R Webster and P Blatchford, 'Making the best use of teaching
assistants: guidance report'. Second edition. London: Education
Endowment Fund, 2018.
48. 'The deployment and impact of support staff (DISS) project'
(http://maximisingtas.co.uk/research/the-diss-project.php) Maximising the
Impact of Teaching Assistants, 2009.
49. 'The Making a Statement (MAST) study'
(http://maximisingtas.co.uk/research/the-mast-study.php) Maximising the
Impact of Teaching Assistants, 2012.
50. 'Inclusion and education: all means all' (https://en.unesco.org/gem-
report/report/2020/inclusion), Global Education Monitoring Report,
UNESCO, 2020.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
90/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
51. It should be noted that this study did not gather data about the subject
and curriculum knowledge, or training for subject and curriculum
knowledge, of the TAs in the sample.
52. For example, P Blatchford and R Webster, 'Classroom contexts for
learning at primary and secondary school: class size, groupings,
interactions and special educational needs', in 'British Educational
Research Journal', Volume 44, Issue 4, 2018, pages 681 to 703.
53. The data collection for this study did not explore school budgets or how
effectively they were used to support pupils with SEND. The Lamb Inquiry
highlighted schools' over-reliance on TAs and the importance of carefully
considered deployment of support assistant time, directed by the teacher
and linked to objectives for the individual child: B Lamb, 'Lamb Inquiry -
special education needs and parental confidence'
(https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130320215632/https://www.educati
on.gov.uk/publications/standard/publicationDetail/Page1/DCSF-01143-2009),
Department for Education, December 2009.
54. Interview data revealed that Robert was entitled to 25 hours of support
but EHC plans were not gathered as part of the data collection. It is
therefore not possible to state that these reported challenges for TA time
allocation led to Robert not receiving his full entitlement to support and
therefore his EHC plan not being fulfilled.
55. For example, 'Identifying special educational needs in the early years:
perspectives from special educational needs coordinators'
(https://www.nasen.org.uk/news/nasen-launches-new-report-identifying-sen-early-
years), National Association for Special Educational Needs, 2020; G
Lindsay, J Ricketts, LV Peacey, JE Dockrell and T Charman, 'Meeting the
educational and social needs of children with language impairment or
autism spectrum disorder: the parents' perspectives', in 'International
Journal of Language and Communication Disorders', Volume 51, Issue 5,
2016, pages 495 to 507.
56. 'Identifying special educational needs in the early years: perspectives
form special educational needs coordinators'
(https://www.nasen.org.uk/news/nasen-launches-new-report-identifying-sen-early-
years), National Association for Special Educational Needs, 2020.
57. Y Anders, P Sammons, B Taggart, K Sylva, E Melhuish and I Siraj-
Blatchford, 'The influence of child, family, home factors and pre-school
education on the identification of special educational needs at age 10', in
'British Educational Research Journal', Volume 37, Issue 3, 2011, pages
421 to 441.
58. 'Special educational needs and disability: code of practice: 0-25 years'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-code-of-practice-0-to-25),
Department for Education and Department of Health and Social Care,
June 2014.
59. B Lamb, 'Lamb Inquiry - special education needs and parental
confidence'
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
91/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
(https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130320215632/https://www.educati
on.gov.uk/publications/standard/publicationDetail/Page1/DCSF-01143-2009),
Department for Education, December 2009.
60. 'Special educational needs and disability: code of practice: 0-25 years'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-code-of-practice-0-to-25),
Department for Education and Department of Health and Social Care,
June 2014.
61. Section 19 of the Children and Families Act 2014
(https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2014/6/contents/enacted) refers to the
support and involvement of children and young people, specifically that a
'local authority in England must have regard to (a) the views, wishes and
feelings of the child and his or her parent, or the young person; (b) the
importance of the child and his or her parent, or the young person,
participating as fully as possible in decisions relating to the exercise of
the function concerned; (c) the importance of the child and his or her
parent, or the young person, being provided with the information and
support necessary to enable participation in those decisions; (d) the need
to support the child and his or her parent, or the young person, in order to
facilitate the development of the child or young person and to help him or
her achieve the best possible educational and other outcomes'.
62. For example, C Shepherd, J Hanson and V Dodd, 'Experiences of
education, health and care plans: a multivariate analysis'
(https://dera.ioe.ac.uk/31432/), Department for Education, March 2018; B
Norwich, 'The future of inclusive education in England: some lessons
from current experiences of special educational needs', in 'REACH
Journal of Special Needs Education in Ireland', Volume 30, Issue 1, 2017,
pages 4 to 21; A Lendrum, A Barlow and N Humphrey, 'Developing
positive school-home relationships through structured conversations with
parents of learners with special educational needs and disabilities
(SEND)', in 'Journal of Research in Special Educational Needs', Volume
15, Issue 2, 2015, pages 87 to 96.
63. For example, 'Identifying special educational needs in the early years:
perspectives from special educational needs coordinators'
(https://www.nasen.org.uk/news/nasen-launches-new-report-identifying-sen-early-
years), National Association for Special Educational Needs, 2020; J
Ricketts, LV Peacey, JE Dockrell and T Charman, 'Meeting the
educational and social needs of children with language impairment or
autism spectrum disorder: the parents' perspectives', in 'International
Journal of Language and Communication Disorders', Volume 51, Issue 5,
2016, pages 495 to 507; B Taggart, P Sammons, R Smees, K Sylva, E
Melhuish, I Siraj-Blatchford, K Elliot, and I Lunt, 'Early identification of
special education needs and the definition of "at risk": the early years
transition and special education needs (EYTSEN) project', in 'British
Journal of Special Education', Volume 33, Issue 1, 2006, pages 40 to 45.
64. There was less evidence overall of pupils being involved in co-production
of provision and, although a few could remember attending meetings for
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
92/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
this, they could not recall the outcomes.
65. According to the SEND code of practice, the role of the SENCo includes
taking responsibility for the routine coordination of specific provision for
pupils with SEN, ensuring that they receive appropriate support and high-
quality teaching. As part of their role, the SENCo should work closely with
staff, parents and other agencies and be the main point of contact with
local support services.
For example, S Pearson, R Mitchell and M Rapti, "I will be 'fighting' even
more for pupils with SEN": SENCos' role in predictions in the changing
English policy context', in 'Journal of Research in Special Educational
Needs', Volume 15, Issue 1, pages 48 to 56; MD Smith and KE
Broomhead, 'Time, expertise and status: barriers faced by mainstream
primary school SENCos in the pursuit of providing effective provision for
children with SEND', in 'Support for Learning', Volume 34, Issue 1, 2019,
pages 54 to 70.
66. Children's and Families Act 2014
(https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2014/6/contents/enacted).
67. 'Improving the educational outcomes of children in need of help and
interim findings' (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/review-of-children-
in-need), Department for Education, March 2018.
68. O Palikara, S Castro, C Gaona and V Eirinaki, 'Professionals' views on
the new policy for special educational needs in England: ideology versus
implementation', in 'European Journal of Special Needs Education',
Volume 34, Issue 1, 2018, pages 83 to 97.
69. It should be noted that due to problems with the sound recording, a full
transcript was not available for council staff in local authority 2. We have
therefore not used quotations as evidence to the same extent for this
local authority.
70. For example, D Crowther, A Dyson and A Millward, 'Supporting pupils with
special educational needs: issues and dilemmas for special needs
coordinators in English primary schools', in 'European Journal of Special
Needs Education', Volume 16, Issue 2, 2001, pages 85 to 97; GJ
Dobson, Understanding the SENCo workforce: re-examination of
selected studies through the lens of an accurate national dataset', in
'British Journal of Special Education', Volume 46, Issue 4, 2019, pages
445 to 464; H Curran, H Moloney, A Heavey and A Boddison, 'It's about
time: the impact of SENCo workload on the professional and the school',
National Association for Special Educational Needs, 2018; H Curran, H
Moloney, A Heavey and A Boddison, 'The time is now: addressing missed
opportunities for special educational needs support and coordination in
our schools' (https://www.bathspa.ac.uk/projects/senco-workload), Bath Spa
University, 2019; H Curran and A Boddison, "It's the best job in the world,
but one of the hardest, loneliest, most misunderstood roles in a school":
understanding the complexity of the SENCo role post-SEND reform', in
'Journal of Research in Special Educational Needs', Volume 21, Issue 1,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
93/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
2021, pages 39 to 48; O Palikara, S Castro, C Gaona and V Eirinaki,
'Professionals' views on the new policy for special educational needs in
England: ideology versus implementation', in 'European Journal of
Special Needs Education', Volume 34, Issue 1, 2018, pages 83 to 97.
71. A service for this local authority comprised of specialist teachers and
education practitioners who worked with local authority schools where
children and young people had progress, SEND or social, emotional or
mental health difficulties.
72. D Crowther, A Dyson and A Millward, 'Supporting pupils with special
educational needs: issues and dilemmas for special needs coordinators
in English primary schools', in 'European Journal of Special Needs
Education', Volume 16, Issue 2, 2001, pages 85 to 97; GJ Dobson,
Understanding the SENCo workforce: re-examination of selected studies
through the lens of an accurate national dataset', in 'British Journal of
Special Education', Volume 46, Issue 4, 2019, pages 445 to 464; H
Curran, H Moloney, A Heavey and A Boddison, 'It's about time: the impact
of SENCo workload on the professional and the school'
(https://nasen.org.uk/news/national-senco-workload-survey-one-year-on-have-
your-say.html), National Association for Special Educational Needs, 2018;
H Curran, H Moloney, A Heavey and A Boddison, 'The time is now:
addressing missed opportunities for special educational needs support
and coordination in our schools' (https://www.bathspa.ac.uk/projects/senco-
workload), University of Bath, 2019; H Curran and A Boddison, "It's the
best job in the world, but one of the hardest, loneliest, most
misunderstood roles in a school": understanding the complexity of the
SENCo role post-SEND reform', in 'Journal of Research in Special
Educational Needs', Volume 21, Issue 1, 2021, pages 39 to 48; O
Palikara, S Castro, C Gaona and V Eirinaki, 'Professionals' views on the
new policy for special educational needs in England: ideology versus
implementation', in 'European Journal of Special Needs Education',
Volume 34, Issue 1, 2018, pages 83 to 97.
73. For example, O Palikara, S Castro, C Gaona and V Eirinaki,
'Professionals' views on the new policy for special educational needs in
England: ideology versus implementation', in 'European Journal of
Special Needs Education', Volume 34, Issue 1, 2018, pages 83 to 97;
'Special educational needs and disabilities'
(https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201920/cmselect/cmeduc/20/2002.htm),
House of Commons Education Committee, October 2019.
74. J Sharples, R Webster and P Blatchford, 'Making the best use of teaching
assistants: guidance report', 2nd edition, Education Endowment Fund,
2018.
75. For example, 'Ofsted Annual Report 2019/20: education, children's
services and skills' (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ofsted-annual-
report-201920-education-childrens-services-and-skills), Ofsted, December
2020; B Lamb, 'Lamb Inquiry - special education needs and parental
confidence'
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
94/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
(https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130320215632/https://www.educati
on.gov.uk/publications/standard/publicationDetail/Page1/DCSF-01143-2009),
Department for Education, December 2009; S Parsons and L Platt, 'The
early academic progress of children with special educational needs', in
'British Educational Research Journal', Volume 43, Issue 3, 2017, pages
466 to 485.
76. M Ainscow, A Dyson and S Weiner, 'From exclusion to inclusion: ways of
responding in schools to students with special educational needs'
(https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED546818), Centre for British Teachers Education
Trust, 2013.
77. For example, 'Identifying special educational needs in the early years:
perspectives from special educational needs coordinators'
(https://www.nasen.org.uk/news/nasen-launches-new-report-identifying-sen-early-
years), National Association for Special Educational Needs, 2020;
C Shepherd, J Hanson and V Dodd, 'Experiences of education, health
and care plans: a multivariate analysis' (https://dera.ioe.ac.uk/31432/),
Department for Education, April 2018; G Lindsay, J Ricketts, LV Peacey,
JE Dockrell and T Charman, 'Meeting the educational and social needs of
children with language impairment or autism spectrum disorder: the
parents' perspectives', in 'International Journal of Language and
Communication Disorders', Volume 51, Issue 5, 2016, pages 495 to 507;
A Lendrum, A Barlow and N Humphrey, 'Developing positive school-home
relationships through structured conversations with parents of learners
with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND)', in 'Journal of
Research in Special Educational Needs', Volume 15, Issue 2, 2015,
pages 87 to 96.
78. 'Ofsted's ethical research policy'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ofsteds-ethical-research-policy),
Ofsted, December 2019.
79. A child achieves a good level of development at the end of the EYFS if
they have achieved at least the expected level in the early learning goals.
This includes the prime areas of learning (personal, social and emotional
development; physical development; and communication and language)
and the specific areas of mathematics and literacy, as well as
understanding the world and expressive arts and design. 'Early years
foundation stage (EYFS) statutory framework'
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/early-years-foundation-stage-
framework--2), Department for Education, March 2014.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
95/96
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Supporting SEND - GOV.UK
OGL
DIEUET
MON DROIT
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
© Crown copyright
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-send/supporting-send
96/96
