Department
for Education
Supporting stammering,
speech, and language
needs in the early years:
a rapid evidence review
with case studies on
working together
Findings report
September 2025
Authors: McKean, c., Charlton, J.,
Knowland, V., Stringer, H., Thomas, U.,
Whelan, A., Millard, S., Levickis, P.,
Murray, L., Richardson, E.
Disclaimer
This research does not represent endorsement by the Department for Education, nor
does it reflect current or future government policy. Materials, resources, and
commercially available products are cited solely as part of the rapid evidence review;
their inclusion does not imply endorsement, and omission does not reflect on their
effectiveness. References to named or third-party products should not be seen as
approval by the authors or the Department.
1
Contents
Disclaimer
1
List of tables
6
Executive summary
7
Introduction
7
Methods
7
Findings
7
Considerations
9
Conclusions
10
Introduction
11
Work package 1: Identification and assessment
15
Introduction
15
Stammering
15
Speech
15
Language
16
The purpose of assessment tools
17
Aims
18
Methods
19
Findings
21
Stammering
21
Psychometric properties of stammering tools
22
Usability of stammering tools
22
Identifying and assessing stammering needs in bilingual children
22
Using the stammering measures to determine support levels
22
Speech
23
Psychometric properties of speech and phonological awareness tools
26
Usability of speech and phonological awareness tools
31
Identifying and assessing speech needs in bilingual children
32
Using the speech measures to determine support levels
32
Language
34
2
Psychometric properties of language tools
41
Usability of language tools
47
Identifying and assessing language needs in bilingual children
48
Using the language measures to determine support levels
49
Conclusions
52
A holistic approach
52
Stammering
53
Speech
54
Language
54
Bilingual children
55
Training
56
Future research
56
Work package 2: Intervention and support
58
Introduction
58
Aims
58
Methods
59
Findings
60
Stammering
61
Support for bilingual children who stammer
64
Speech
64
Phonological awareness intervention
64
Speech Recasts
66
Evidence summary of universal and targeted interventions for speech
67
Support for bilingual children's speech
67
Learning from specialist speech interventions
68
Language
70
Universal and targeted support
72
Universal support
74
Targeted support
79
Evidence summary of universal and targeted interventions for language
92
Support for bilingual children's language
94
3
Learning from specialist language interventions
96
Conclusions
99
Prioritising universal support
99
Selecting targeted interventions
100
Supporting specific needs
101
Training
102
Future research
103
Work package 3: Working together
104
Introduction
104
Aims
104
Methods
105
The rapid review findings
106
The important of working together
106
How collaboration works: who is involved and what it entails
107
Impact on early years practitioners
109
Impact on children aged 0-5 years
110
Impact on parents and caregivers
111
Key characteristics of successful working together
112
Barriers to effective collaborative working
113
The case study findings
114
The aims of working together
114
Leadership
115
Intervention programmes and tracking progress
115
Capability: Knowledge and skills
116
Training and knowledge of interventions
116
Knowledge of when and how to refer for specialist support
117
Gathering data about children
117
Sharing knowledge with parents and caregivers
118
Supporting each other
118
Supporting parents and caregivers
118
Resources for universal and targeted interventions
118
4
Sustainability
119
Motivation: Confidence and belief
119
Engaging with parents and caregivers
120
Conclusions
120
Types of working together
121
The importance of leadership
122
Training
122
Shared knowledge
122
Including parents and caregivers
123
Data collection and monitoring
123
Bilingualism/home languages
123
Opportunity: Relationships and resources
123
Supporting each other
123
Working together
124
Efficient use of resources
124
Referring to specialist services
124
Setting boundaries
125
Resources
125
Motivation: Confidence and belief
125
Appendix A. Glossary
126
Appendix B. Evidence Appraisal Tables
132
Appendix C. Effect Size Tables
141
References
148
5
List of tables
Table 1. Age range, skills assessed and purpose of available tools for speech and
phonological awareness
24
Table 2. Descriptive characteristics of identification and assessment tools for speech and
phonological awareness
25
Table 3. Psychometric properties of identification and assessment tools for speech and
phonological awareness
27
Table 4. Age range and purpose of available tools for language
35
Table 5. Descriptive characteristics of identification and assessment tools for language 38
Table 6. Psychometric properties of identification and assessment tools for language 42
Table 7. Effect size table and corresponding months of progress and impact
60
Table 8. Specialist stammering approaches or techniques, along with their applicable age
ranges in the pre-school years and potential level of support
62
Table 9. Applicable age ranges in the pre-school years and the level of support for
speech interventions
64
Table 10. Specialist speech approaches or techniques, along with their age range within
the pre-school years and appropriate level of support for potential non-specialist delivery
68
Table 11. Applicable age ranges in the pre-school years and the level of support for
language interventions
71
Table 12. Country where the universal and targeted language interventions were
developed and their availability for use in practice
93
Table 13. Specialist language approaches or techniques, along with their applicable age
range within the pre-school period and level of support for potential non-specialist
delivery
96
Table 14. Case study location and indices of deprivation (National Statistics, 2019)
106
6
Executive summary
Introduction
This rapid review explores how early years practitioners and settings can better support
children with stammering, speech and language needs, and promote strong
communication development across universal and targeted support levels. Three core
areas were examined: (1) identification and assessment; (2) support and intervention;
and (3) working together.
Methods
Three work packages were completed using recognised scoping, rapid, and systematic
review methods to identify, evaluate, and synthesise the relevant evidence.
Identification and assessment: Evidence from literature, databases, and experts was
evaluated using recognised diagnostic and psychometric benchmarks. Findings informed
best-practice guidance for tools to support universal, targeted and specialist provision.
Support and intervention: Studies and reviews were analysed using frameworks such as
TIDieR and EEF standards to identify effective interventions. Evidence included
universal, targeted, and some specialist-level strategies.
Working together: Literature and five case studies (across regions) were synthesised
using implementation frameworks (e.g. COM-B (Capability, Opportunity, Motivation and
Behaviour), TDF (Theoretical Domains Framework) to identify effective collaboration
approaches.
Findings
No validated or reliable measures were identified in this review that are currently
available for use by early years practitioners to assist in the identification of stammering.
Research suggests early years practitioners and parents can reliably identify
stammering, though variability in stammering between home and school means
discussion with parents and caregivers is vital and any parental concerns about
stammering taken seriously. The WellComm tool provides helpful guidance as to when to
refer to a Speech and Language Therapist (SLT).
Speech needs can be identified by assessing how intelligible the child is to others;
whether they are producing age-appropriate sounds; and whether their speech difficulties
are affecting confidence or participation. If a child presents with a Speech Sound
Disorder (SSD), they must receive an individualised support programme, planned, and
7
delivered, or overseen, by a SLT. Tools such as the Intelligibility in Context Scale (ICS),
SpeechLink, Speech Participation and Activity Assessment of Children (SPAA-C) and
speech milestones are available, but all require additional validation and psychometric
evaluation for the UK and early years context. In addition, two assessments of
phonological awareness, PIPA (Preschool and Primary Inventory of Phonological
Awareness) and NAPA (Newcastle Assessment of Phonological Awareness), can help
determine whether a child may benefit from targeted phonological awareness
interventions.
For identification of language needs, fourteen tools with reported psychometric properties
were found, with a subset reporting the best psychometric properties include the British
Picture Vocabulary Scales, the Infant/Reception Language Link, Language Screen and
the Sure Start Language Measure. No single tool fully captures all needs or ages making
multi-tool approaches essential. The WellComm supports collaborative practice and
covers a wide age-range, but its psychometric properties require further evaluation. Input
from SLTs is an essential part of settings' identification of language needs.
Our review found limited evidence for interventions addressing stammering at universal
or targeted levels, though strategies drawn from specialist literature may help reduce the
risk of persisting stammering and/or reduce negative consequences. For children with a
SSD, two targeted approaches, Phonological Awareness intervention and Recasting, are
supported by moderate and good evidence, respectively. Additional techniques such as
auditory bombardment and phonological contrast activities may also be beneficial. For
language, sixteen studies on language interventions were identified, though the overall
quality was variable. Six programmes, including the Nuffield Early Language Intervention
(NELI), NELI Pre-school, Developing Talkers, Educator-Implemented Storybook
Vocabulary Intervention, Happy Talk, and Talk Boost, showed good evidence of
effectiveness. Universal strategies in addition to targeted support is essential. Effective
approaches consistently emphasised creating language-rich environments through
methods such as responsive interaction, dialogic reading, explicit instruction, modelling,
and repetition.
In terms of working together, collaborative, tiered models of speech and language
support, developed and delivered in partnership across the children's workforce, provide
the most efficient and effective means of delivering universal, targeted, and specialist
support equitably. All models place children and their parents or caregivers at the centre,
aiming to ensure timely, high-quality support that improves long-term outcomes. The
review identified clear benefits of integrated approaches for practitioners, families, and
children. Essential features of successful partnership working include strategic leadership
(involving senior SLTs, school and early years leaders, and local authority stakeholders),
open communication, cross-professional networking, and hands-on collaboration. These
models promote shared skills and knowledge, boost practitioner confidence, and
8
accuracy in identification, and enable more effective use of specialist resources. For
children, they lead to improved speech and language outcomes and earlier support. For
parents and caregivers, benefits include increased confidence in supporting their child,
stronger relationships, and better engagement with wider services.
Considerations
Effective implementation of speech and language support in early years settings relies on
holistic, well-trained identification processes and tiered interventions. Assessment tools
alone are insufficient; practitioners require training to interpret results and consider
contextual factors, especially for bilingual children. Universal provision should emphasise
inclusive communication environments and high-quality, speech and language enriching
interactions, while targeted support can address speech, language, and stammering
needs more directly.
Children with SSD, or significant language difficulties should be referred to Speech and
Language Therapy, with additional strategies used to support communication in the
meantime and alongside specialist provision. Children who stammer should be referred
to Speech and Language Therapy where the family are concerned, and/or it is affecting
the child's confidence or participation socially and educationally.
Key targeted strategies for SSD include phonological awareness interventions, recasting,
auditory bombardment. For stammering, creating stammering-accepting environments is
key. For both SSD and stammering practitioners should avoid corrective feedback and
ensure all forms of communication are valued.
For language, a small number of evidence-based targeted interventions are available.
Settings should choose those which are evidence-based, and contextually appropriate,
and must ensure they are delivered accurately. For bilingual children, maintaining
support in their home language strengthens cultural and cognitive development while
promoting connection to their wider family and community.
Collaborative models developed locally between early years settings, SLTs, parents,
Health Visitors, and other professionals are essential to meet diverse community needs
and use resources effectively. Local leaders across early years, health, and social care
should take responsibility for maintaining partnerships, setting practice standards, and
driving continuous improvement. Regular review of children's progress and provision
data enables responsive support and helps evaluate system-level effectiveness.
Effective implementation of evidence-based speech and language support relies on
accessible, ongoing training. Designating a speech and language lead in each early
years setting enables coordination across identification, support, and collaboration.
These leads can cascade expertise, liaise with SLTs, support audits, and guide
9
intervention delivery. All early years practitioners benefit from training in speech and
language development, stammering, assessment interpretation, speech, and language
enriching universal strategies, and partnering with families. Leads require more
specialised training in intervention selection, coaching, and quality improvement.
Conclusions
While some effective tools and interventions exist, key gaps remain, particularly in high-
quality identification tools and universal or targeted interventions for speech and
stammering.
Measuring the impact of stammering, speech and language needs on children's
educational and social participation remains a challenge; This impact is a key
consideration to inform specialist referral and so the lack of suitable tools for early years
practitioners makes this a research priority. Similarly, the limited availability of high-
quality, scalable universal and targeted interventions, especially for speech and
stammering, suggests an urgent need for further development and evaluation. Particular
attention should be paid to the tailoring required for successful implementation across
early years settings. In addition, the effects of environmental and communicative
strategies on communicative participation and wellbeing need further study.
Collaborative models across early years services should be evaluated at system level for
reach, impact, and cost-effectiveness. Finally, bilingual children are underrepresented in
current tools and interventions, making inclusive development for this group a critical
priority.
10
Introduction
Early speech and language development sets the stage for children's educational
progress, social relationship development, and mental health and well-being (McKean et
al., 2017b, Eadie et al., 2018, Le et al., 2021, Westrupp et al., 2020, Dubois et al., 2020).
As such, it is now widely recognised as a key driver of children's health and life chances
across the life course (Law et al., 2017b, Law et al., 2017a, Schoon et al., 2009, Schoon
et al., 2010, Law et al., 2009, Briley et al., 2021, McAllister et al., 2012).
Many children do not develop robust speech and language skills and need additional
support. International studies demonstrate that, on average, this represents
approximately 7-14% of preschool children (Law et al., 2017b). However, the gradient
which exists in language abilities associated with social disadvantage means these
difficulties are distributed unfairly (Reilly and McKean, 2023, Reilly et al., 2014b, McKean
et al., 2018), with prevalence being much higher in socially disadvantaged populations,
rising to 40% of children in some settings (Law et al., 2011).
Not only is it vital to support children with difficulties or those at risk of poor speech or
language development, but due to the crucial role of speech and language in literacy,
numeracy, self-expression, mental health, and well-being, the provision of language-
enriching early years experiences is essential to ensure all children can reach their
potential.
The early years (0-5 years) represent a crucial developmental window within which to
make a difference in children's language development. Support in the preschool period
capitalises on the rapid brain growth occurring at this stage to bring larger benefits than
later interventions. This results in higher 'returns' in the longer term through
developmental cascades where early acquired skills (e.g., vocabulary knowledge,
phonological awareness) enable later skills (e.g., literacy) to be more readily acquired
(Shonkoff, 2011).
Since the COVID pandemic, the need to find ways to ensure that all children develop
robust language skills has become more acute. The changes to children's early life
experiences during the pandemic have increased the prevalence and inequality of needs
(Erbay and Tarman, 2022, Zuniga-Montanez et al., 2005). This has happened alongside
the departure of experienced practitioners from speech and language therapy and early
years professions (Early years Alliance, 2021, RCSLT, 2022), and severe and sustained
cuts in local government spending on early years services (Action for children, 2021).
These unprecedented pressures on families, early years services and SLTs have
exacerbated the inequalities in language skills between disadvantaged children and their
more advantaged peers (Tracey et al., 2022).
11
It has always been essential that the development of robust speech and language skills
is a shared responsibility across the children's workforce. Speech and language learning
occurs in all spheres of a child's daily life, from infancy to adulthood. To support language
development for all children, and ameliorate the problems of those with language
difficulties, any support must be able to cut-across service, contextual and age-related
boundaries. Practitioners working in the early years must have the knowledge, skills, and
capacity to play their part (McKean et al., 2019, Law et al., 2022). This has become yet
more important in the current context of unprecedented needs and a depleted workforce.
Tiered models of speech and language support, developed and delivered collaboratively,
involving the whole children's workforce working together, are designed to enable
Universal, equitable reach and the most efficient and effective deployment of resources,
skills and knowledge (Reilly and McKean, 2023, McKean and Reilly, 2023, Gascoigne,
2006, Gascoigne, 2021) (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Tiered model of speech and language support
Specialist
Tier 3
Targeted
Tier 2
Universal
Tier 1
Professionals collaborate to provide universal, targeted and specialist support:
Specialist support refers to approaches used for children with identified needs
requiring individualised programmes of support delivered and/or overseen by
SLTs.
Targeted support approaches are used for children who are stammering, are at
risk of speech and language needs, and/or are not meeting age-related
expectations in speech or language
12
who are not meeting criteria for SLT referral and/or
where the SLT agrees the Targeted offer is appropriate to meet the child's
current needs and/or constitutes a period of dynamic assessment.
Universal support includes approaches used across a whole setting or population
that promote robust speech, language, and communication development for all
children. This includes the identification of children with and at risk of stammering
and/or speech and language needs.
This rapid review was commissioned by the Department for Education and was
completed between February and July 2024. The aim is to identify the best current
evidence to inform the provision of universal and targeted support for children with
speech, language, and communication needs (SLCN) by early years practitioners.
The review focuses on identification, support, or interventions, and working
collaboratively for children with SLCN in the early years:
Stammering (also known as stuttering) is characterised by whole and part-word
repetitions, prolongations and blocking of sounds, and may be accompanied by
physical tension, additional movements, and/or avoidance of words or speaking.
Speech refers to the production and use of speech sounds including consonants
(e.g., p, b, m, s) and vowels (e.g., ah, ee, 00) to convey a message in a given
language.
Language is the understanding and use of words, sentences, and grammatical
markers (e.g. -ing; -ed) to share meaning.
The review does not address the needs of children with autism and/or pragmatic or social
communication needs. This was both because a parallel review for autism was planned
where we anticipated relevant research for communication needs would be identified,
and to ensure the scope of the review was possible with the available resources and time
frame.
The review comprised three work packages to identify evidence relevant to the non-
specialist early years workforce with respect to:
1. Identification and assessment tools
2. Interventions and support
3. Working together
This report summarises the findings and conclusions that can be drawn from each work
package's evidence review. A Supplementary Evidence Report is also available and
published by Newcastle University, which provides additional detailed results, data
extraction tables, and analyses.
13
A rapid review method provides an overview and synthesis of the available evidence of
relevance to each work package. The nature of available evidence for each work
package varies. For example, Work Package 1: Identification and assessment, includes
assessment manuals and peer-reviewed papers; Work Package 2: Intervention and
support, includes peer-reviewed papers; and finally Work Package 3: Working together,
includes peer-reviewed papers, grey literature, and qualitative case studies. Given this,
differing methods were used to identify, appraise and synthesise the evidence for each
work package.
Full methods, including the inclusion and exclusion criteria, search terms and quality
assessment appraisal methods, are outlined in a separate Methodology report. Given the
nature of a rapid review, the methodology does not guarantee a fully comprehensive
identification of all available evidence. However, we can be confident that the review
includes the large majority of sources of relevant evidence.
14
Work package 1: Identification and assessment
Introduction
Stammering, speech, and language needs in the early years vary, with differing
prevalence, natural history, consequences, and presentation. These differences bring
different implications for early identification.
Stammering
Stammering (also known as stuttering or dysfluency) is characterised by whole and part-
word repetitions, prolongations and blocking of sounds. Internationally, approximately 5-
8% of children will stammer for a period of time, mostly starting between the ages of 2
years and 6 months and 6 years old (Yairi and Ambrose, 2013). Early years practitioners
are likely to be the first professionals to notice stammering or to be approached by
parents or caregivers who are concerned about their child's fluency.
As many as 80% of preschool children who start stammering will stop (Yairi and
Ambrose, 2013), but it is not possible to identify which children will continue to stammer
into later childhood and adulthood. Whether the stammer resolves or persists, it can have
considerable impact on a child's ability and confidence to communicate while it is
present. Interactions with their peers and emotional well-being can be affected (Langevin
et al., 2010). There may also be considerable impact on the child's parents and
caregivers, with parents reporting high levels of anxiety, feelings of guilt and
hopelessness, as well as a loss of confidence in their parenting skills (Langevin et al.,
2010). For those who continue to stammer into teen and adult years, there can be
significant mental health consequences and impacts on educational and professional
attainment (McAllister et al., 2012, Briley et al., 2021).
Speech
'Speech' refers to the production and use of speech sounds to convey a message in a
given language. Some children find producing and using speech sounds more difficult
than their peers. This may be seen with or without co-occurring difficulties in receptive or
expressive language, or other areas of communication. Prevalence estimates vary, but a
large and robust study from Australia found 3.4% of four-year-old children have a clinical
difficulty with speech sounds (Eadie et al., 2015), equating to roughly one child in every
thirty children in an early years setting. The most commonly used formal term for a
clinically significant difficulty in this domain is a Speech Sound Disorder (SSD).
As young children develop their speech they make frequent errors, often making them
difficult to understand, especially for unfamiliar listeners. Data on how easy children are
15
to understand, or how intelligible they are, give us some guidelines to follow about
whether children are developing their speech typically. The most recent data from a
sizable sample of American children (Hustad et al., 2020) show that an unfamiliar listener
with no context will typically understand about half of what a child says by their third
birthday. However, by the time they are 4 years old they should be mostly intelligible to
others (Hustad et al., 2020).
Pre-school children with a SSD frequently have co-occurring difficulties with phonological
awareness (speech sound awareness). Phonological awareness refers to children's
conscious awareness of and ability to play with the sounds that make up spoken words.
Tasks that tap into phonological awareness include clapping along to the syllables in
multisyllabic words, identifying and making up rhymes, and identifying the first or last
sound in words. Three-quarters of children with a SSD find these tasks more challenging
than their peers (Broomfield and Dodd, 2004). Difficulties with phonological awareness
also have significant implications for children's literacy and vocabulary development.
Phonological awareness will be considered in this report alongside speech.
Language
Language is the understanding and use of words, sentences, and grammatical markers
to share meaning. Language can be thought of as having two modalities: receptive and
expressive. Receptive language is the process of understanding what is said, sometimes
also called comprehension; while expressive language is the process of using language,
sometimes called language production.
Key components of early language are:
Vocabulary: the use and understanding of single words.
Sentence structures: the use and understanding of word and phrase combinations
to convey differing meanings.
Grammatical markers: the use and understanding of grammatical markers such as
'-ing', '-ed', and plural 's' to convey differing meanings.
Discourse structures: the use and understanding of sequences of sentences for
differing purposes, for example to tell simple narratives.
In the early years, the prevalence of language difficulties is estimated at 7-14%, varying
slightly with age and being more prevalent in socially disadvantaged populations (Law et
al., 2017b). Before the age of 4, there is a great deal of volatility in children's language
development (Law et al., 2017b). For example, approximately 30% of children with low
language at 2 years old go on to have persistent language difficulties, while half of
children with language difficulties at 4 years were typical talkers at 2 years old (Reilly et
al., 2014a). Hence, children can grow out of and into language difficulties over the pre-
16
school years. Once children reach 4 years old, however, their relative language abilities
become more stable. If a child reaches 4 years old with language difficulties, these are
likely to persist and require specialist support (McKean et al., 2017c).
Early language interventions capitalise on the period of greatest brain growth, realising
larger benefits than later interventions, and creating a developmental cascade where
early acquired skills (e.g., vocabulary knowledge) enable later skills (e.g., literacy) to be
more readily acquired (Shonkoff, 2011). Children's response to early intervention also
provides diagnostic and prognostic information that can be used to efficiently direct those
who require them to targeted and specialist services. Importantly, the effects of
environmental influences on children's relative language abilities start early (Fernald et
al., 2013, Hoff, 2003) and may account for a large proportion of their effects by the time a
child reaches 4 years old. If we are to leverage these factors for preventative
interventions we need to do so early in development (Bornstein et al., 2016, McKean et
al., 2017b, McKean et al., 2015). Waiting until the child enters school potentially misses
an important opportunity to provide preventative interventions that harness the social
determinants of language development.
Assessment tools must, therefore, be embedded within a whole systems approach,
which provides a continuum of support across a continuum of need and monitors
children's development to enable children to move up and down levels of support as their
needs change over time (Law et al., 2017b).
The purpose of assessment tools
Tools used to assess a child's speech and language have a number of purposes: to
identify children who are likely to have needs and therefore may require onward referral
for full assessment and/or targeted support; to track progress over time; and to identify a
child's strengths and needs across domains of speech and language to inform where and
how to provide support. These assessments are not 'diagnostic.' Diagnosis can only be
determined by holistic assessment and by the relevant specialist practitioner (a Speech
and Language Therapist in the case of the needs described in this report). There is a
temptation to use assessments as 'screens': assessing whole classes at a single time
point and using cut-points in scores and Red-Amber Green or 'RAG ratings' to determine
levels of support. While assessments such as these are useful, all such tools are only
ever an indicator of potential need and should be interpreted together with the educator's
holistic knowledge of the child together with monitoring over time. This is especially
important as the child's response to additional support can be highly informative, and
because children who appear to be progressing well at an earlier point can present with
problems later if they do not progress at the expected rate and so fall behind their peers
(Reilly and McKean, 2023).
17
Aims
Work package 1: Identification and assessment aims to identify and compare the
effectiveness of different measures and tools for identifying potential stammering,
speech, and language needs by answering the following research questions:
1. Which measurement tools are available to Early years Practitioners to identify
children's stammering, speech, and language needs across the early years?
2. What are the performance parameters of these measurement tools (e.g.
reliability/validity/specificity)?
3. Which measurement tools are most appropriate for use by staff in early years
settings? What are the advantages and disadvantages of the different tools?
4. How can these tools be used to guide decisions regarding the provision of
universal, targeted or specialist support?
5. Which profiles of need are likely to require immediate specialist referral?
18
Methods
We applied recognised search, and data extraction strategies and methods of data
extraction, summary and appraisal used in 'desk-based' and/or scoping reviews (Grant
and Booth, 2009). Full methods, including the search strategy, inclusion criteria,
extraction, and appraisal of data are reported in the Methodology Report.
Once the tools were identified, we sourced publications to provide the necessary details
to summarise the characteristics of each tool and appraise their psychometric properties.
To do this, we first identified manuals and primary papers which describe the
development and psychometric properties of the tools. We then conducted searches in
SCOPUS and EBSCO for papers published after the date of the manual publication
which include the name of the tool in the title or abstract to check if further evaluation had
been conducted. Additionally, we checked with the authors whether further evaluations
had been published.
To assess the performance parameters of the identified measurement tools, the
psychometric properties and quality criteria were considered in the evaluation of tool
quality. The psychometric properties considered are drawn and adapted from Asunta et
al. (2019).
When evaluating the tools, the following properties were considered:
Normative sample: Consideration of the sample used to develop, standardise, and
create norms for the tool in terms of representativeness of the UK population and
size. Tools can provide biased estimates of development if they do not include
children from a wide demographic spectrum which mirrors the UK population. For
example, they may over or under-estimate how children perform at a given age.
We also consider the size of the sample. The larger the sample the more confident
we can be that the norms in the tool are reliable.
Usability: A qualitative judgement regarding how feasible, practical, and easy a
tool is for practitioners to use.
Accuracy in identifying needs: Measured using sensitivity and specificity metrics
which describe how accurate the test is in identifying children with and without
difficulties in the domain that is assessed.
Validity: The degree to which an assessment tool measures the construct it is
designed to measure (i.e. vocabulary, grammar, or speech). This can provide
confidence that it really is giving insights into a child's stammering, speech, and
language needs. There are multiple types of validity. We consider:
Concurrent validity: degree to which a measure aligns with well-established
measures of the same construct. If a newer assessment for stammering
19
produces results that closely align with those from a trusted, widely used
assessment, we can be more confident in its accuracy.
Discriminant validity: the ability to differentiate between groups with known
differences. A good test should be able to detect differences where they
genuinely exist. For example, it should show distinctions between younger
children (who might have more limited vocabulary) and older children (with
more developed vocabulary).
Face validity: the degree to which practitioners who use it trust that it
provides a fair measure of the construct. Important for practical acceptance;
if practitioners feel the tool is intuitive and aligns with their understanding of
stammering or language issues, they are more likely to trust and use it.
Cross-cultural validity: consideration as to whether tools have been
evaluated in non-monolingual or non-English speaking groups. Many
speech and language assessments are developed for English-speaking,
monolingual populations. Without considering cross-cultural validity, these
tools might not work well for children from diverse linguistic backgrounds,
leading to inaccurate or biased results.
Reliability: Reliability refers to how consistently a measurement tool produces
results, the consistency and precision of the measure. Lack of reliability introduces
error into the measurement process reducing the confidence we can have that it is
providing a true representation of the child's abilities. We consider:
Internal consistency: how well the different items within the measurement
tool measure the same underlying construct.
Test-retest reliability: whether the tool would yield the same results if
repeated multiple times. This evaluates whether the same tool gives
consistent results when used with the same person at different times,
assuming their abilities have not changed. A test should produce similar
results if administered to the same child on different days (under similar
conditions). If results vary widely, the test may be unreliable.
Inter-rater reliability: whether the test would yield the same results if used
by two different administrators. If their ratings are similar, the test has high
inter-rater reliability.
Modern psychometrics: classical test theory has been challenged in recent years
with respect to potential inaccuracies (Cappelleri et al., 2014). In addition to the
'classic' psychometric properties described, we also note if tool development
included more modern methods of development, including Rasch analysis and
Item response theory. These approaches enable higher confidence in a tool's
ability to detect individual differences between children and within individual
children over time (Jabrayilov et al., 2016).
20
Although some metrics and properties are rarely clearly reported (such as usability,
cross-cultural validity), we included them in the review to point out the need for further
research to examine these factors. We also consider aspects which may not be apparent
to users of the tools (e.g. normative sample, reliability) to support practitioners to be
critical consumers of the available tools.
The reporting quality is categorised as: low quality reporting; moderate quality reporting;
good to excellent quality reporting; reported but unclear; reported but quality rating not
applicable i.e. quality criteria do not exist or are inappropriate; and not reported.
Findings
Twenty-two tools were identified which are designed to identify and assess stammering,
speech, and/or language needs. Tools have been described and summarised in respect
to their psychometric properties (where available) and their recommended use for
stammering, speech, and language in turn. We describe which measures are available;
their psychometric properties; their usability; application to bilingual children; and how the
measures inform the determination of the level of support required (universal, targeted, or
specialist).
Stammering
No validated or reliable measures were identified in this review that are currently
available for use by early years practitioners to assist in the identification of stammering,
evaluation of its severity or impact, or to determine whether interventions or referral are
appropriate. However, the WellComm speech and language toolkit provides a clear and
helpful description of the overt speech characteristics of stammering, as well as guidance
on when to refer to an SLT.
Observations of children's development are a core competence of early year practitioner
practice. As such, it would be expected that practitioners would identify the presence of
stammering through observations in everyday interactions with the child. There is
evidence that early years practitioners can reliably identify whether a child's speech is
stammered, stuttered or fluent (Einarsdóttir and Ingham, 2008) as well as parents and
caregivers (Einarsdóttir and Ingham, 2009).
Accuracy and certainty in identifying stammering can be increased through training
(Hearne et al., 2021) and through conversations with parents and caregivers. There is
evidence that providing teachers with a fact sheet about stammering and a 20-minute
video designed for the educational workforce increases awareness (Hearne et al., 2021,
Berquez et al., 2011). Conversations with parents and caregivers relies on the nature of
21
the practitioners' partnerships and relationships with parents or caregivers. Strategies to
enable such partnerships are described in Work Package 3: Working together.
Importantly, children's stammering can be variable and may not appear in all speaking
situations, so observations by parents or caregivers and early years staff may not always
align. Therefore, if practitioners observe signs of stammering, encouraging discussions
with parents and caregivers would allow their views to be understood. It is important for
practitioners to take parental concerns about stammering seriously, even if they have not
observed it themselves.
Psychometric properties of stammering tools
The WellComm speech and language toolkit has not been evaluated to determine
whether the use of its stammering guidelines result in appropriate identification or
decisions regarding onward referral. Critical evaluation with reference to the evidence
suggests that the WellComm stammering guidance is generally evidence-based and
consistent with expert recommendations. However, training for early years practitioners
would be essential for optimal implementation of the WellComm guidance.
Usability of stammering tools
The usability of WellComm, which includes guidance on identifying stammering, has
been evaluated through educator surveys (Dysart and Code, 2023). Practitioners
comment on the use of the screening tool and the "Big Book of Ideas". However, this
review found no published evidence or evaluations that specifically address the usability
of the stammering guidance.
Identifying and assessing stammering needs in bilingual children
The current understanding of stammering and bilingualism is limited, and evidence
suggests that identifying stammering in bilingual populations may be more complex
(Choo et al., 2020). Typically, children will stammer in both languages, but may stammer
more, or less, in one or the other. Stammering may be over-diagnosed in bilingual
children (Byrd et al., 2015), so if stammering is suspected, discussion with parents or
caregivers and an SLT will be necessary to understand whether the behaviours are
stammering or more language based. For example, hesitancies and repetitions may be
due to difficulty finding the right words or forming correct sentence structures rather than
stammering itself.
Using the stammering measures to determine support levels
Universal
An essential component of good universal practice is the ability to identify children who
stammer and decide when to refer them for specialist support.
22
For universal support, early years practitioners should focus on creating an environment
where all forms of communication are valued, differences are accepted and celebrated,
and strategies are used to promote all children's success in sharing and understanding
ideas (Hearne et al. 2021).
Targeted
In terms of targeted support, following assessment by a SLT, early years practitioners
may be asked to provide information about a child's behaviour and communication. This
might include information about how the child is communicating with peers and adults,
the stammering behaviours, and how the child and others are responding or reacting to
the stammering. The early years workforce has a crucial role in noticing whether
stammering is having an impact on a child's confidence and ability to communicate, as
well as their acceptance in their peer group, signs of exclusion or stigma.
Specialist
Children who stammer should be referred to specialist support through a SLT for in-depth
assessment and individualised therapy if parents or caregivers have concerns about their
stammering, or if their child is responding negatively to their speech. The SLT may then
conduct an assessment to identify the factors that are significant for that child and make
recommendations based on those (Clark et al., 2017, Brundage et al., 2021).
Subsequently, interventions for stammering must be delivered by an SLT. Following
guidance from the SLT, early years practitioners will be involved with using strategies to
support the child to communicate successfully in the classroom and to reduce the
potential risks of negative consequences associated with stammering (Hearne et al.,
Brundage et al., 2021).
Speech
Assessment of the speech sounds that children use can be approached in three ways.
Firstly, by measuring intelligibility, which is how easily the child can be understood.
Secondly, by comparing the sounds the child can and cannot say to typical
developmental milestones; and thirdly, through specialist assessment of the sounds
children use, the errors they make and why they make those errors. Only the first two
approaches are available to early years practitioners; specialist assessment must be
completed by a SLT. Two further areas also relevant to the assessment of speech
sounds are phonological awareness and communicative participation. Phonological
awareness, a foundation skill for literacy for all children, falls firmly within the remit of
early years practitioners. Although phonological awareness is both a speech and a
language skill, supporting children's phonological awareness is relevant to supporting
children with speech difficulties. Based on this, it has been considered within the speech
section of this review.
23
It is also important to understand if and how a child's speech errors may be affecting the
child's communicative participation at school, at home and with friends. Communicative
participation difficulties could influence the decision for specialist referral if the child has
only mild difficulties, but these difficulties are affecting their daily life.
These approaches to assessment of the speech sounds that children use are discussed
in turn. Five tools that can be used for speech and phonological awareness, along with
the age range they cover, and their purpose are summarised in Table 1. Some tools
applicable to the language domain also include some speech and phonological
awareness items (Ages and Stages Questionnaire (ASQ); Early Language Identification
Measure and Intervention (ELIM-I); Every Child a Talker (ECAT); Speech and Language
UK Progress Checker; Teddy Talk; and WellComm). These tools are discussed in the
Language section of this review.
Table 1. Age range, skills assessed and purpose of available tools for speech and
phonological awareness
Tool
Skills assessed
Age (years)
Purpose
Intelligibility in
Speech intelligibility
4-5
Identification of
Context Scale (ICS)
need
(McLeod et al.,
2012a)
Newcastle
Language
3 and above
Identification of
Assessment of
(phonological
need; tracking
Phonological
awareness)
progress; profiling
Awareness (NAPA)
strengths and
(Stringer, 2019)
needs
Preschool and
Language
3-6
Identification of
Primary Inventory of
(phonological
need
Phonological
awareness)
Awareness (PIPA)
(Dodd et al., 2000)
SpeechLink
Speech
4-8
Identification of
(Speech and
need
Language Link,
2023)
24
Tool
Skills assessed
Age (years)
Purpose
Speech
Speech
Unclear
Identification of
Participation and
need; tracking
Activity Assessment
progress
of Children (SPAA-
C) (McLeod, 2024)
Table 2 summarises the specific skills assessed, type of assessment (direct assessment;
observation; rating checklist; parent/practitioner report); who the tool is designed for; and
costs and training required for use for each of speech and phonological awareness tools
discussed in this review.
Table 2. Descriptive characteristics of identification and assessment tools for
speech and phonological awareness
Tool
Type of
Who the tool is
Cost
Training
assessment
designed for
requirements for
use
Intelligibility
Rating scale by
Speech and
Free
No specific training;
in Context
parent or
language
administrative
Scale (ICS)
caregiver
therapist
guidance available
online
Newcastle
Direct
Teachers;
Free
Instructions in
Assessment
assessment
speech and
manual, online
of
language
tutorials available
Phonological
therapists
Awareness
(NAPA)
Preschool
Direct
Teachers;
£198
No specific training;
and Primary
assessment
speech and
manual available for
Inventory of
language
purchase
Phonological
therapists
awareness
(PIPA)
SpeechLink
Direct
Teachers
£250 per
Provided online at
assessment
year per
no extra cost
school
25
Tool
Type of
Who the tool is
Cost
Training
assessment
designed for
requirements for
use
Speech
Rating scale
Speech and
Free
Instructions
Participation
(child); broader
language
available online
and Activity
report
therapists;
Assessment
educators
of Children
(SPAA-C)
Psychometric properties of speech and phonological awareness tools
Based on the publications identified in this review, few tools for assessing speech and
phonological awareness have been evaluated sufficiently to provide information on their
psychometric properties. Where available, the evidence on the reliability and validity of
each of the tools and approaches are considered and summarised.
26
Table 3 summarises the psychometric properties of the identified speech and phonological awareness tools, indicating whether these
properties were reported in the sources reviewed and, where possible, the quality of reporting those properties. The reporting quality is
categorised as: low quality reporting (L; pale blue); moderate quality reporting (M; blue); good to excellent quality reporting (G; dark blue);
reported but unclear (U; pale yellow); reported but quality rating not applicable (RNA; grey); and not reported (NR; white). The '1'
indicates where multiple indicators of differing quality levels were presented; and the highest quality rating is represented.
Table 3. Psychometric properties of identification and assessment tools for speech and phonological awareness
Tool
Represent-
Size
Usability
Sensitivity/
Concurrent
Discriminant
Face
Cross-
Internal
Test-
Inter-
ativeness
Specificity
validity
validity
validity
cultural
consistency
retest
rater
validity
reliability
reliability
reliability
Intelligibility in
RNA
M
U
L
M
NR
NR
RNA
G
G
NR
Context Scale
Newcastle
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
Assessment of
Phonological
Awareness
Preschool and
RNA
G
NR
NR
G¹
NR
NR
NR
G¹
G¹
U
Primary
Inventory of
Phonological
awareness
SpeechLink
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
G
Speech
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
RNA
NR
NR
NR
Participation
and Activity
Assessment of
Children
Measuring intelligibility
Intelligibility is the most suitable measure for children's speech in early years settings as
it focuses on how successfully the child can get their message across.
The Intelligibility in Context Scale (ICS) (McLeod et al., 2012a) consists of a set of 5-point
scales completed by a parent or caregiver, which assesses how intelligible the child is to
a range of different communication partners (Table 1). The ICS is free and requires no
specific training for use by parents or caregivers (Table 2). This subjective scale has
reliable and valid data from many countries around the world (McLeod, 2020), including
English-speaking countries like Australia (McLeod et al., 2012b), although it has not yet
been tested with a representative UK sample.
Reliability reaches good-to-excellent levels and validity moderate levels, making it a
robust tool to use in early years settings where different practitioners may be working
with a child (Table 3). Furthermore, it has been validated in multiple languages.
Sensitivity reaches acceptable levels, but specificity does not, meaning some children
who do not need support may be identified as having difficulties. This balance in favour of
sensitivity is a useful characteristic for a first screen.
To facilitate referral and discussions with other professionals, it is helpful for early years
practitioners to determine how intelligible a child is in their setting. Although an intuitively
simple task, in practice it is not always easy to estimate what percentage of a child's
speech is understandable. There is a large amount of variability between children with
regard to intelligibility, and pinpointing expectations is very difficult. Intelligibility is likely to
differ according to the context in which the child is speaking, and who is listening to them.
Furthermore, it can vary depending on how fast they talk (which remains highly variable
between children even at age five) (Schölderle et al., 2021), and how loudly they talk,
which may be different in different environments.
No published research was found during the rapid review that assesses the reliability or
validity of early years practitioner's intelligibility judgements. However, some work has
considered the reliability and validity of this task with unfamiliar listeners listening to
children's spontaneous speech. Lagerberg et al. asked unfamiliar listeners to transcribe
the spontaneous speech of 4-to-7-year-old children with and without a SSD (Lagerberg et
al., 2014). The correlation between intelligibility ratings and an objective measure of
accuracy in children with SSD was high (0.79). Similar validity has been shown with 4-to-
5-year-old children (Gordon-Brannan and Hodson, 2000), indicating that subjective and
objective ratings of speech show good correspondence.
Early years practitioners may therefore have the tools to gather information about a
child's intelligibility through their own estimates, plus information gathered through the
ICS from parents and caregivers. Research by Wren et al. (2016) and Hustad et al.
(2020) suggest practitioners should refer children for specialist support if they are aged 3
years and 6 months or older and their speech is unintelligible to strangers (Wren et al.,
2016), if they are aged 4 years or older and their speech is unintelligible 50% or more of
the time (Hustad et al., 2020), or if their speech is having an impact on participation or
self-esteem.
Comparing the sounds the child can and cannot say to typical development
milestones
The second way speech sounds can be assessed is through comparing the sounds a
child can and cannot say to typical developmental milestones. Children acquire the
speech sounds of their ambient language in a fairly predictable order, although there is a
large amount of variability between children in the timing, exact order, and how quickly
they master each new sound.
As a rough guide, we can look across studies measuring age of mastery, which is the
age at which 90% of children are able to make and use a given speech sound. The most
recent data from the UK (Dodd et al., 2003) show mastery of the following sounds by the
time children are aged 3 years and 6 months: p, b, t, d, k, g, m, n, ng, f, V, s, Z, h, W, I, y.
Other sounds, particularly 'th' and 'r', may not appear until 6 or 7 years of age. These
guidelines hold regardless of gender or family background (Dodd et al., 2003).
Speech milestones are available in the WellComm toolkit, which uses UK norms
(Grunwell, 1985) and there is some guidance in Every Child a Talker (Department for
Children, Schools and Families, 2008), and Teddy Talk. Additionally, the RCSLT recently
published freely accessible guidance about SSD (RCSLT, 2024). Some tools, such as
WellComm recommend that early years practitioners monitor children's speech with
reference to these milestones. No evidence was found during the review regarding the
reliability and validity of practitioners' ability to benchmark children against speech
development milestones.
SpeechLink provides an online assessment tool to screen children's (aged 4-8) speech
and monitor progress (Table 1). The tool is designed to determine whether children
present with age-appropriate speech (which may include some errors typical for their
age), whether they would benefit from in-school support on account of showing delayed
speech, or whether they have atypical speech and require further specialist assessment
(Table 2). During assessment, children are shown a picture and asked to name it. The
adult completing the assessment with them is prompted to listen to the initial or final
sound in that word. The adult is given a set of responses to indicate what they have
heard the child say, including the target sound and the most typical errors children make.
For example, for the initial sound in 'cat', their options are 'c', 't', 'd', 'g', 'no sound' or
'other'. The SpeechLink speech screen is based on developmental norms from Dodd et
al. (2003).
The concurrent validity of the SpeechLink assessment tool has not been established with
reference to an SLT-led speech assessment and analysis, meaning we do not yet have
29
evidence that the Speech Link assessment accurately does what it sets out to do (Table
3). The authors indicate that pilot work indicated high reliability of the teaching assistant
(TA)-led online assessment: TAs were found to select the same option as SLTs on 99%
of trials (Ritchie, personal communication, 6ᵗʰ June 2024).
Specialist assessment
The third approach, specialist assessment, can only be used by SLTs and is essential for
planning an appropriate intervention for children who have poor intelligibility. The SLT
identifies and analyses all the errors that children make and the reasons they make them.
Even if children are physically able to make all the speech sounds typically mastered by
their age, they may not be able to use them in the right places in words. Some errors are
very common. For example, cluster reduction is where children use one sound where an
adult would use two or three next to each other: 'pider' instead of 'spider', or 'tawberry'
instead of 'strawberry'.
Cluster reduction is commonly seen in English-speaking children until they turn 4 years-
of-age (Dodd et al., 2003). Familiar adults find it easy to tune into common errors such as
this as they are predictable. This type of error in a child older than 4 years old would
suggest their speech sound development is delayed. Other errors such as replacing a 't'
with a 'k' (producing 'bat' as 'back'), would be classed as 'atypical' as this error is not
commonly seen in children at any age. Children who make 'atypical' errors are less easy
to tune into, and these children are very likely to need specialist support to become more
intelligible.
Phonological awareness
Phonological awareness can be formally assessed, with most standardised assessments
available from the age of 3 (Dodd et al., 2000). It can also be informally assessed from
the same age. Early informal assessment can help identify children whose speech sound
difficulties may impact on their early phonics acquisition when they reach the Reception
year, highlighting a need for early targeted support.
Children with low intelligibility may benefit from informal assessment of phonological
awareness from approximately age 3 to guide targeted support for this skill set where
phonological awareness activities are not a routine part of universal provision. From this
age, children should begin to develop syllable-level phonological awareness. With
sufficient adult support they should be able to clap along to the syllables in familiar words
and start to understand that familiar compound words such as 'rainbow' have two parts
that can be said separately. For example, if an adult says the first part "rain" from
"rainbow", the child should be able to finish the word by saying the second part, "bow".
Formal phonological awareness measures developed in the UK and available for use by
early years practitioners are the Preschool and Primary Inventory of Phonological
Awareness (PIPA) (Dodd et al., 2000) and the Newcastle Assessment of Phonological
30
Awareness (NAPA) (Stringer, 2019) (Table 1). Both assessments consider a child's
awareness of syllables (e.g., clapping along to the syllables in multisyllabic words),
rhymes (e.g., identifying whether two words rhyme or not), and phonemes (e.g.,
identifying the first sound in a word) (Table 2). The aim of the NAPA is to establish the
child's Zone of Actual Development (what they can currently achieve independently) and
their Zone of Proximal Development (what they can achieve when given some support
(Vygotsky, 1986). The child's Zone of Proximal Development is indicative of what the
child could independently achieve given appropriate intervention, thereby helping
language and education professionals to set goals for them.
Although the PIPA (Dodd et al., 2000) provides UK norms, the psychometric properties of
the assessment are reported for other English-speaking samples. Properties are variable
for this assessment across subtests, with test-retest reliability ranging from poor-to-
excellent, and concurrent validity ranging from good-to-excellent (Table 3). This variability
suggests that the PIPA may be more useful for mapping a child's profile across different
areas of phonological awareness, but less useful for comparing children to their peers.
The psychometric properties of the NAPA measure (Stringer, 2019) have not been
evaluated (Table 3).
Communicative participation
Finally, early years practitioners can likely make a judgement regarding the degree to
which a speech sound disorder is affecting the child's communicative participation in their
setting. They may want to gather wider evidence about how it is affecting the child in
other contexts to decide if a referral to an SLT is needed for milder difficulties or whether
the strategies they have implemented to support successful communication are effective.
The Speech Participation and Activity Assessment of Children (SPAA-C) may be useful
(McLeod, 2024) (Table 1). The SPAA-C is designed to collect information about the
impact of speech difficulties on children's lives (Table 2). It includes questions for
different significant people (the child, parents, caregivers, siblings, teachers, and friends)
and child self-report ratings of how they feel about their speech across different contexts.
The psychometric properties of the SPAAC have not been evaluated (Table 3).
Usability of speech and phonological awareness tools
Usability was difficult to judge from the published papers and manuals found from this
review. Often only the time taken to administer a tool is reported. For the ICS, this is
reported to be 5 minutes, while the PIPA takes 25-30 minutes, and the NAPA up to 30
minutes. Usability details for the SPAA-C and milestone tools (WellComm, ECAT,
RCSLT guidelines) were unavailable (Table 3).
The usability of WellComm, which provides developmental milestones for speech, has
been evaluated through educator surveys and semi-structured interviews (Dysart and
Code, 2023). In this evaluation report, usability for the speech component was not
31
explicitly discussed, but a number of practitioners expressed concern that the WellComm
did not pick up children with speech difficulties.
Formal usability data for SpeechLink are unavailable.
Identifying and assessing speech needs in bilingual children
The prevalence of SSD in bilingual or multilingual children is similar to that for
monolingual children (Hambly et al., 2013). Whether assessed for intelligibility by known
adults, or assessed for errors by an SLT, bilingual or multilingual children should be
assessed in all their ambient languages (McLeod et al., 2023). When considering
intelligibility in early years settings, it is important to gather caregivers' observations
about intelligibility in contexts where multilingual children speak languages other than
English (the ICS is available in 66 languages to allow this assessment) (McLeod et al.,
2015, McLeod et al., 2012b, McLeod et al., 2012a). It is equally important that SLTs
consider speech sound development across languages for bilingual and multilingual
children, as rate and patterns of speech errors do not follow those of monolingual
children (Hambly et al., 2013). It follows that if practitioners are using developmental
milestones to support observation of a child's speech, they should not assume that a
child with multiple languages will follow the same developmental pathway as a child
growing up in a monolingual environment.
Using the speech measures to determine support levels
Universal
A key element of universal provision is phonological awareness support at the
appropriate developmental level for the child. Early years practitioners play an essential
role in preparing children for formal education. In early literacy, children need to enter
their Reception year with a solid foundation in phonological awareness, at least at the
level of the syllable. They should be able to independently clap out the syllables in
familiar multisyllabic words, such as 'butt-er-fly', and provide a missing syllable. For
example, if shown a picture of a butterfly and told, "This is a butterfly. The word butterfly
has three parts, I will start it, and you finish it; butt-er-" the child should respond with 'fly'.
An additional syllable level skill is the identification of rhyme. A valuable skill for a child
entering formal phonics tuition is the ability to judge whether two words rhyme. However,
a child at this stage should not be able to generate rhyme, as this is classed as part of
phoneme level awareness.
An additional essential component of good universal practice is the ability to identify
children with speech difficulties and refer them to SLT. If a child is not reaching a level of
intelligibility comparable with other children or is not using a number of the sounds
expected for their age, then they should be referred for specialist assessment.
32
Research by Wren et al. (2016) and Hustad et al. (2020) suggests that being
unintelligible to strangers at age 3 years and 6 months old is a risk factor for persistent
speech sound difficulties (Wren et al., 2016) and should prompt a referral. Similarly, if
50% or more of a child's speech remains unintelligible at age 4 years old or older (Hustad
et al., 2020), they should be referred to an SLT. If a child is having difficulty making just
one or two of the sounds expected for their age, most commonly 's' and 'z', they would
typically not receive specialist support during the pre-school years, unless that the
difficulty was impacting their self-confidence or how likely they are to take part in
activities. Practitioners should consider the potential impact this is having for the child in
the early years setting and discuss any wider effects with parents or caregivers. The
SPAA-C measure may be useful to gather this kind of data formally.
Targeted
When a child is often unintelligible, in addition to referring them to an SLT, practitioners
can provide targeted support for phonological awareness and use communication
support strategies. This can be done while waiting for the SLT's assessment or in
collaboration with the SLT once a programme of intervention has been planned.
Phonological awareness assessments, such as the PIPA and the NAPA, can help
identify children with delayed phonological awareness development. Phonological
awareness follows a rough developmental pattern, whereby large segment awareness
(word and syllable awareness, and rhyme identification) precedes small segment
awareness (phoneme awareness). Phonological awareness can be assessed to indicate
where to start with a targeted intervention and re-assessed after a period of targeted
support to enable progress monitoring.
SpeechLink provides resources for in-school support of children with speech sound
delays, that is, children who use speech sound errors typical of a younger child.
SpeechLink recommends specific programmes of support for children based on their
speech screen. For example, a four-year-old child who uses 't' instead of 's' would be
recommended a set of listening and production activities that focus on that specific error.
While this programme has not been formally evaluated, it is based on established
intervention practices. SpeechLink recommends referral to speech and language therapy
for children who show a pattern of atypical speech sound errors at screening
assessment.
Specialist
To be effective and safe, interventions for SSD must be delivered by an SLT, or an SLT
assistant (SLTA) or early years practitioner under the direct supervision of an SLT or
SLTA. Speech interventions must be tailored to a child's specific speech profile, as
inappropriate approaches can be ineffective and potentially harmful, leading to feelings of
33
failure and frustration. Ongoing speech and language therapy oversight is essential, as
children's speech profiles and intervention needs change over time.
It is essential to bear in mind that speech sound disorders can have a substantial impact
on children's participation and activity (McCormack et al., 2009) as well as their peer
relationships (Wren et al., 2023). As such, the right support at the right time is critical for
children with low intelligibility.
Language
A much larger number of assessment tools are available for children's language
compared to speech and stammering. However, they vary with respect to the age-ranges
covered, their intended purpose (identification of need, profiling strengths and
weaknesses and monitoring progress) and their methods of assessment (parental report,
direct testing, observation) (Table 4; Table 5).
34
Table 4. Age range and purpose of available tools for language
Tool
Skills
Age (years)
Purpose
assessed
Ages and Stages
Speech;
10 months - 5
Identification of need
Questionnaire (ASQ)
Language
years
(Squires and Bricker,
(global speech,
2009)
language, and
communication
skills)
British Picture
Language
3-6
Identification of need;
Vocabulary Scale
(receptive
tracking progress
(BPVS) (Dunn et al.,
vocabulary)
2009)
Early Language
Speech;
1-3
Identification of need
Identification
Language
Measure and
(global SLC
Intervention (ELIM-I)
skills;
(Law et al., 2023)
expressive
vocabulary)
Every Child a Talker
Speech;
0-5
Identification of need;
(ECAT) (DCSF,
Language
tracking progress; profiling
2008)
(expressive and
strengths and needs
receptive
language;
speech sounds;
social
communication)
Grammar and
Language
3-6
Identification of need
Phonology Screening
(grammar and
test (GAPS) (Van der
phonological
Lely et al., 2006)
memory)
ILL/RLL Infant
Language
1-6
Identification of need;
Language Link (ILL)
(receptive and
tracking progress; profiling
and Reception
expressive
strengths and needs
Language Link (RLL)
language)
(Patterson et al.,
2013, Patterson et
al., 2014)
35
Tool
Skills
Age (years)
Purpose
assessed
LanguageScreen
Language
3-6
Identification of need;
(Hulme et al., 2024)
(expressive and
tracking progress; profiling
receptive
strengths and needs
vocabulary;
listening
comprehension;
sentence
repetition)
Oxford
Language
11 months - 26
Identification of needs
Communicative
(expressive and
months
Development
receptive
Inventory (CDI)
vocabulary)
(Hamilton et al.,
2000)
Renfrew Action
Language
3-8
Identification of need;
Picture Test (RAPT)
(expressive
profiling strengths and
(Renfrew, 2019)
language)
needs; tracking progress
Renfrew Bus Story
Language
3-6
Identification of need;
(Renfrew, 2001)
(expressive oral
tracking progress; profiling
narrative skills;
strengths and needs
scoring
information
load;
grammatical
complexity)
Speech and
Speech;
6-11
Identification of need;
Language UK
Language
tracking progress
Progress checker
(expressive and
(Speech and
receptive
Language UK)
language;
attention and
listening;
speech; social
communication)
36
Tool
Skills
Age (years)
Purpose
assessed
Structure of Growing
Language
1-5
Identification of need;
Skills III (SOGS)
(expressive and
tracking progress; profiling
(Bellman et al., 1996)
receptive
strengths and needs
language;
vocalisations)
Sure Start Language
Language
1-3
Identification of need;
Measure (SSLM)
(expressive
tracking progress
(Harris et al., 2004)
vocabulary)
Teddy Talk (Teddy
Speech;
18 months - 5
Identification of needs;
Talk Test, 2022)
Language
years
profiling strengths and
(expressive and
needs
receptive
language;
speech sounds)
UK Bilingual Toddler
Language
1-3
Identification of need
Assessment Tool (UK
(expressive and
BTAT) (Plymouth
receptive
University Baby Lab,
vocabulary)
2024)
UK-Communicative
Language
10 months - 3
Identification of need;
Development
(expressive
years
tracking progress
Inventory (UK CDI)
vocabulary)
(Alcock et al., 2020)
Wellcomm (Sandwell
Stammering;
10 months - 6
Identification of need;
and West
Speech;
years
tracking progress; profiling
Birmingham
Language
strengths and needs
Hospitals NHS Trust,
(expressive and
2015)
receptive
language;
grammar;
speech sounds;
fluency and
voice)
37
Table 5. Descriptive characteristics of identification and assessment tools for
language
Tool
Type of
Who the tool
Cost
Training requirements for
assessment
is designed
use
for
Ages and Stages
Rating scale
Health care
$295
User guide and training
Questionnaire
(by parent or
professional;
DVDs available for
(ASQ)
caregiver)
early years
purchase
practitioners
British Picture
Direct
Education
£324
No specific training; kit
Vocabulary Scale
assessment
professionals
comes with a manual;
(BPVS)
training video and support
available online.
Early Language
Checklist (by
Health visiting
Free
Handbook available online
Identification
parents or
practitioners
Measure and
caregiver) and
Intervention
observation
(ELIM-I)
Every Child a
Observation
Early language
Free
Online guide to delivery
Talker (ECAT)
lead
practitioners
Grammar and
Direct
Education,
Free
None
Phonology
assessment
health, and
Screening test
social care
(GAPS)
professionals
ILL/RLL Infant
Direct
Early years
£375
Training videos and
Language Link
assessment
practitioners
webinars
(ILL) and
Reception
Language Link
(RLL)
LanguageScreen
Direct
Early years
£275-
No specific training;
assessment
practitioners
£395 per
information available on
year
website an app
Oxford-
Checklist (by
Parents,
Free
None
Communicative
parent or
caregivers,
Development
caregiver)
education, or
Inventory (CDI)
health
professionals
38
Tool
Type of
Who the tool
Cost
Training requirements for
assessment
is designed
use
for
Renfrew Action
Direct
Speech and
£97.14
No specific training; kit
Picture Tet
assessment
language
included instruction booklet
(RAPT)
therapist;
with guidance
SENCO;
teachers
Renfrew Bus
Direct
Teachers;
£56.34
None; manual to be
Story
assessment
speech and
consulted before use.
language
therapists
Speech and
Parent or
Parents,
Free
No specific training
Language UK
caregiver;
caregiver, or
Progress Checker
practitioner
educators
report
Structure of
Direct
Health visitors;
Unknown
Manual; training course
Growing Skills III
assessment;
paediatricians;
(training not mandatory)
(SOGS)
observation;
general
checklist (by
practitioner
practitioner)
(GP)
Sure Start
Checklist (by
Early years
Free
No specific training
Language
parent or
practitioners
Measure (SSLM)
caregiver)
Teddy Talk
Direct
Early years
£125
Training delivered by
assessment;
practitioners;
speech and language
observation
health visitors;
therapists (£50 per person)
speech and
language
therapists;
family support
workers;
parents;
caregivers;
childminders;
teachers;
portage home
visitors
UK Bilingual
Broader report
Early years
Free
Tutorial videos available
Toddler
(by parents or
practitioners
online
Assessment Tool
caregivers)
(UK BTAT)
39
Tool
Type of
Who the tool
Cost
Training requirements for
assessment
is designed
use
for
UK-
Checklist (by
Education and
£24.99
No specific training; manual
Communicative
parents or
health
available for purchase
Development
caregivers)
professionals;
Inventory (UK
speech and
CDI)
language
therapist
Wellcomm
Checklist (by
Early years
£449
Handbook and bespoke
parents,
practitioners;
online training delivered in
caregivers,
SENCO;
schools or trusts.
practitioners);
teaching
observation;
assistants;
direct
speech and
assessment
language
therapists
Different assessment methods offer distinct advantages, disadvantages, and suitability
for varying groups of children. Whilst direct testing standardises judgements more reliably
than observational tools, observational approaches provide more holistic judgements
about how a child functions in the real world. This may be more important for children
who are less familiar with testing situations, or the types of tasks included in standardised
tests, perhaps due to varying family and cultural characteristics.
Similarly, parental report measures provide valuable insights into a child's language and
communication within the home environment, which may differ from observations in early
years settings, particularly when a child has recently joined a new setting or if they are
temperamentally more 'shy'. However, an individualised approach is needed as not all
parents or caregivers will find this an easy task and may need support to complete tools
for reasons such as literacy and language differences, or unfamiliarity of making
judgements and observations of their child's development. The optimal approach is to
use more than one method to assess a child's language abilities and to always
contextualise any test score with wider knowledge of the child from the early years
practitioner and the parents or caregivers.
To make appropriate use of such tools, training is essential. While many tools come with
guidance, videos, or training courses, it is perhaps more important to have the skills to
interpret those scores. This involves synthesising the results with wider knowledge of the
child, language development, speech, language, and communication needs (SLCN) to
make decisions regarding next steps for the child. Broader training is required, as is the
development of specialist knowledge in key staff members (for example, speech and
40
language leads) and the embedding of decision-making within models of partnership with
SLTs (see Work Package 3: Working together).
Psychometric properties of language tools
A total of seventeen tools were identified which measure language (Table 4). An
additional two focus on phonological awareness (PIPA and NAPA). While phonological
awareness is a language skill, supporting children's phonological awareness is relevant
to supporting children with speech difficulties. Given this, PIPA and NAPA tools are
discussed in the speech section under Phonological awareness.
For three tools, namely, Every Child a Talker (ECAT), the Speech and Language UK
Progress Checker, and Teddy Talk, there were no published details regarding their
psychometric properties (Table 6). ECAT is a tool describing children's development at
various ages which practitioners can use to benchmark children's development against
(Table 5). We are aware that the ECAT programme involved substantial development
work, but we were unable to find a clear methodology for developing or evaluating the
ECAT tool. Speech and Language UK Progress Checker is an online questionnaire run
by Speech and Language UK which briefly indicates whether a child may need support
based on responses to a series of questions linked to language and communication
milestones (Table 5). Thirdly, Teddy Talk is an informal direct assessment of speech and
language, revolving around the use of toys and props. Instructions increase in complexity
as the number of 'key words' increases.
Of the remaining fourteen tools, the Renfrew Action Picture Test (RAPT) and Oxford
Communicative Development Inventories (CDI) only report data regarding the size and
nature of the standardisation sample with no other psychometric detail provided (Table
6). RAPT is a direct assessment of children's language in which children describe a
series of pictures while an adult transcribes their responses (Table 5). The responses are
then scored based on the accuracy and complexity of the information (their meaning) and
the grammar used in the sentences. The Oxford CDI is a development inventory where
parents or carers are asked to fill in a checklist of the words children understand or use. It
is a 416-item vocabulary checklist of words which can be downloaded or completed
online.
The following focuses on the remaining twelve tools with available evaluation of their
accuracy in identifying needs and psychometric characteristics.
41
Table 6 summarises the psychometric properties of the identified language tools, indicating whether these properties were reported in the
sources reviewed and, where possible, the quality of reporting those properties. The reporting quality is categorised as: low quality
reporting (L; pale blue); moderate quality reporting (M; blue); good to excellent quality reporting (G; dark blue); reported but unclear (U;
pale yellow); reported but quality rating not applicable (RNA; grey); and not reported (NR; white). The '1' indicates where multiple
indicators of differing quality levels were presented; and the highest quality rating is represented.
Table 6. Psychometric properties of identification and assessment tools for language
Tool
Represent-
Size
Usability
Sensitivity/
Concurrent
Discriminant
Face
Cross-
Internal
Test-
Inter-
ativeness
Specificity
validity
validity
validity
cultural
consistency
retest
rater
validity
reliability
reliability
reliability
Ages and stages
RNA
G
NA
L
G
NR
NR
RNA
U
G
G
Questionnaire
British Picture
RNA
G
U
NR
G
NR
NR
NR
U
G
NR
Vocabulary
Scales
Early Language
RNA
L
U
M
NR
NR
NR
RNA
NR
NR
NR
Identification
Measure and
Intervention
Every Child A
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
Talker
Grammer and
RNA
M
NR
L
M
NR
NR
NR
G
NR
NR
Phonology
Screen
Infant and
RNA
G¹
U
NR
G
U
NR
NR
G
G
NR
Reception
Language Link
LanguageScreen
U
G
U
NR
G
NR
NR
NR
G
G
NR
Oxford CDI
RNA
L
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
Tool
Represent-
Size
Usability
Sensitivity/
Concurrent
Discriminant
Face
Cross-
Internal
Test-
Inter-
ativeness
Specificity
validity
validity
validity
cultural
consistency
retest
rater
validity
reliability
reliability
reliability
Renfrew Action
RNA
M
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
RNA
NR
NR
NR
Picture Test
Renfrew Bus
RNA
L
NR
M
G
NR
NR
RNA
NR
M
U
Story
Speech and
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
Language UK
Progress Checker
Schedule of
RNA
L
NR
M1
G
NR
NR
NR
G
NR
NR
growing skills III
Sure Start
RNA
M
NR
G
G
NR
NR
NR
G
G
NR
Language
Measure
Teddy Talk
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UK CDI
U
G
NR
NR
M
NR
NR
NR
M
NR
NR
WellComm
U
NR
NA
L
G
NR
RNA
NR
NR
NR
NR
43
Accuracy in identifying needs
Seven assessment tools report their accuracy in identifying needs in terms of sensitivity
(the ability to correctly identify children with difficulties) and specificity (the ability to
correctly identify children without difficulties). Following the quality ratings framework by
Law et al. (2000) and Michael et al. (2013), these tools were classified as good-to-
excellent when both sensitivity and specificity exceeded 80%, moderate when the
combined accuracy of sensitivity and specificity was at least 150 (e.g., 75% sensitivity
and 75% specificity), and low when this sum was below 150.
Only one tool, the Sure Start Language Measure (SSLM), met the threshold for good-to-
excellent accuracy in identifying needs, with sensitivity at 83% and specificity at 80%
(Wilson et al., 2022) (Table 6). The SSLM has the best accuracy in identifying needs of
the available tools found in this review and is particularly suited to identifying needs in
young children (Table 4). The SSLM, a 100 or 50-item vocabulary checklist, is a free
parental report measure that provides a valid and reliable assessment of young children's
vocabulary development (Table 5). While it has a moderate standardisation sample (n =
1290), it is highly representative in terms of ethnicity and maternal education, though its
geographic representation is limited to England (Table 6). Some parents or caregivers
may need support to complete the checklist reliably, however the SSLM is embedded
within the Early Language Identification Measure and Intervention (ELIM-I) process
alongside practitioner observation which can facilitate important conversations about a
child's language development.
The ELIM-I is also suited for early identification of speech and language needs in young
children (Table 4; Table 5). It demonstrates moderate accuracy in identifying needs, with
high sensitivity (98%) but lower specificity (63%) (Law et al., 2024) (Table 6). The tool
was developed for use within Health Visiting teams and is based on a relatively small but
diverse sample (n = 362), drawn from five regions in England representing a range of
urban and rural areas, socioeconomic status, and ethnicity profiles (McKean et al., 2022)
(Table 5; Table 6). The sample was slightly skewed towards lower socioeconomic status
but included families from all socio-economic deciles as defined using the Income of
Deprivation Affecting Children Index (IDACI) (Law et al., 2023). Although no direct
reliability and validity measures are available for the ELIM-I as a whole tool, these can be
extrapolated from the SSLM for the wordlist component.
Two additional tools, the Renfrew Bus Story and Schedule of Growing Skills III (SOGS),
also demonstrate moderate accuracy in identifying needs. The Renfrew Bus Story, a
narrative assessment using a story retell task, was standardised on a small UK sample (n
= 573) and has good validity but lower reliability, particularly in terms of inter-rater
reliability when scoring narrative complexity (Table 5; Table 6). It is a test of oral narrative
skills, measured by a story recall task. Both the grammatical complexity of the child's
utterances and the information load used is scored. The tester shares a textless story
picture book with the child. The child listens to the tester telling the story and then, with
the picture book to prompt them, retells the story. The child's story recall is recorded, and
transcription is scored for grammatical complexity and information load.
The SOGS achieves moderate accuracy in identifying needs for children aged 25-52
months but has lower accuracy for younger children (0-24 months) (Table 6). SOGS is a
developmental screen that uses "guided" activities to assess 9 areas of development.
The assessment of language is split into two skill areas, receptive (hearing and
language) and expressive (speech and language). It was standardised on a small sample
(n = 348) with some demographic data available, though the extent to which the sample
represents the UK population remains unclear. The tool has strong concurrent validity
and good reliability in terms of internal consistency. However, we do not know about test-
retest reliability. The Renfrew Bus Story and SOGS may be useful in slightly older
children, ages which are not covered by the SSLM and ELIM-I.
Three tools, Grammar and Phonology Screen (GAPS), WellComm, and Ages and Stages
Questionnaire-3 (ASQ-3), were rated as having low accuracy in identifying needs (Table
6). The GAPS tool, which assesses grammatical processing through repetition tasks, has
moderate concurrent validity and good internal consistency reliability but lacks reported
test-retest reliability. Its standardisation sample was moderately sized (n = 688).
WellComm's sensitivity and specificity have been evaluated in children aged 3 to 6 years,
with results showing sensitivity of 88% and specificity of 58.5% (Sandwell and West
Birmingham Hospitals NHS Trust, 2015) (Table 6). In children aged 30 to 35 months,
sensitivity was 74% and specificity was 68% (Seager and Abbot-Smith, 2016). These
results contribute to a low-quality rating for the tool. While its high sensitivity is a positive
feature for an identification tool, the overall balance between sensitivity and specificity
means that both under- and over-identification can occur. WellComm is valued for its
usability and integration of multiple assessment methods, including observation, parental
report, and direct testing. However, it has not been formally standardised, and its norms
were derived from prior research rather than an independent sample, raising concerns
about validity and potential bias. Concurrent validity is good, but we were not able to
identify robust measures of reliability (Sandwell and West Birmingham Hospitals NHS
Trust, 2015) (Table 6).
The ASQ-3 has excellent specificity (98-100%) but poor sensitivity (25-48%) in the
language and communication domain (Wilson et al., 2022; Duggan et al., 2023) (Table
6). Originally designed to estimate population-level needs (in five domains:
communication, gross motor, fine motor, problem solving, and personal-social), the ASQ-
3 was not intended to identify individual children requiring intervention (Lysons et al.,
2024). It has not been standardised on a UK population, and its cut-points in score were
not empirically derived. While it can be useful for assessing holistic development within a
broader developmental review, it is not appropriate for identifying speech and language
needs in early years settings.
45
Psychometric robustness
In terms of psychometric robustness, five tools have moderate to good standardisation
samples and strong validity and reliability measures: the ASQ-3, the British Picture
Vocabulary Scales third edition (BPVS III), the Infant/Reception Language Link,
Language Screen, and SSLM (Table 6). With the exception of the SSLM, all these tools
employ modern psychometric techniques, such as item response theory or Rasch
analysis, increasing confidence in their quality. However, this shortlist does not fully cover
the range of assessment purposes and age groups required for identifying, tracking, and
supporting speech and language development in children aged 0-5 years.
Four tools, the GAPS, Renfrew Bus Story, SOGS, and UK-CDI, demonstrate both validity
and reliability, though their standardisation samples are smaller or less representative
(Table 6). The three remaining tools, the ELIM-I, UK Bilingual Toddler Assessment Tool
(UKBTAT), and WellComm, have documented validity but lack clear reliability data.
The BPVS III is a well-validated measure of receptive vocabulary, a key predictor of
literacy and other language skills (Table 5). In terms of use, children respond to a
stimulus word by selecting a picture from four options that best illustrates that word's
meaning. Its large standardisation sample (n = 3278) was stratified to represent school
achievement across different regions (Table 6). Modern psychometric methods were
used but sensitivity and specificity are not reported. While BPVS III is useful for
measuring progress in response to universal and targeted provision, it should not be
used in isolation for identifying language needs.
The Infant and Reception Language Link tools provide reliable and well-validated
resources for identifying speech and language needs across a broad age range (1-5
years) using modern psychometric methods (Table 4). Reception Language Link (RLL)
has an extensive standardisation sample (n = 32,233), while Infant Language Link's (ILL)
sample is more moderate (n = 769) (Table 6). The demographic representativeness of
these samples is well-documented, though there was some geographic bias toward
southern England. Although sensitivity and specificity data were not available, the tools
are considered reliable and effective for tracking language development over time.
The LanguageScreen is a short, tablet-based tool designed to assess children's
language skills and track their progress (Table 5). It was initially developed to support the
Nuffield Early Language Intervention (NELI) programme using modern psychometric
methods. Language Screen is robust, valid, and reliable. We were unable to find a
measure of its sensitivity and specificity in identifying children with needs. The tool has
been developed and standardised using an extremely large sample of children (n =
350,000) However, the demographic representativeness of this sample, particularly
regarding social disadvantage and geographical diversity, is unclear.
46
The UK-CDI is a parental report measure, consisting of a checklist of words and gestures
that a child can say or understand (Table 5). It is standardised in the UK with a relatively
large sample (n = 1693) (Table 6). Significant efforts were made to ensure the cohort was
representative of the UK population in terms of socioeconomic status, gender, region,
and other demographic factors (Jago et al., 2023; Alcock et al., 2020). It has moderate
validity and internal consistency reliability, though test-retest reliability data were not
available.
Finally, the UKBTAT, specifically designed for bilingual language assessment, is based
on a small standardisation sample (n = 372) (Table 6). It is an online tool designed to
help early years practitioners in the UK to decide whether a 2-year-old bilingual toddler is
at risk of a language delay (Table 5). It is intended for children learning British English
plus an additional language from the following: Bengali, Chinese Cantonese, Dutch,
French, German, Greek, Hindi/Urdu, Italian, Chinese Mandarin, Polish, European
Portuguese, and Welsh. While demographic factors were reported, it is unclear how
representative the sample is of the UK bilingual population. The tool has good validity,
but no reliability measures were identified in this review (Table 6).
In summary, the SSLM is the most accurate in identifying needs, while the ELIM-I,
Renfrew Bus Story, and SOGS offer moderate accuracy in identifying needs. Tools such
as BPVS III, Infant and Reception Language Link, and LanguageScreen provide
psychometric robustness but without evaluation of sensitivity and specificity and other
relevant measures it is difficult to be sure of their accuracy in identifying needs. Indeed,
the BPVS, as measure only of vocabulary, could miss many children with difficulties in
other domains. The UK-CDI and UKBTAT show promise but require further reliability
testing, and tools like GAPS, WellComm, and ASQ-3 demonstrate limitations in their
accuracy in identifying needs. A comprehensive approach to assessment should
consider multiple tools, balancing accuracy in identifying needs, psychometric
robustness, and practical usability.
Usability of language tools
Usability is difficult to judge from the published papers and manuals available for this
review. The vast majority simply present data regarding the time taken to complete the
assessment.
The acceptability of the ASQ-3 at the 2 to 2 years and 6 months year Health Visitor
review has been evaluated and is generally acceptable to parents or caregivers and
professionals (Lysons et al., 2024, Kendall et al., 2019). However, there are some
reported concerns about its applicability in the UK due to 'Americanised' language and
the potential to raise anxiety unnecessarily in families, although this is a consideration for
all early identification tools, not just the ASQ-3. The importance of practitioner training for
appropriate use is also emphasised as both implementation (e.g. scoring) and
47
interpretation of scores can vary considerably. Appropriate skills and knowledge
regarding broader developmental evaluation are required to make appropriate
judgements regarding a child's developmental progress (Lysons et al., 2024, Kendall et
al., 2019, Law et al., 2020).
The usability of WellComm within a context of training and support from SLTs has been
evaluated through educator surveys and semi-structured interviews (Dysart and Code,
2023), where practitioners comment on the use of the screening tool and the 'Big Book of
Ideas'. In this evaluation, overall ratings for usability were good with the need for support
and training and a period of learning and adjustment required emphasised.
Identifying and assessing language needs in bilingual children
The ASQ-3 has been adapted for use in a number of different languages and cultural
contexts. The CDI also has versions available in a range of languages; however, these
are not standardised on UK populations speaking these languages nor do they take
account of the bilingual context. The UKBTAT is specifically designed for bilingual
populations, although for a very narrow age range and limited number of languages. No
other tools identified here have been adapted for use with languages other than English
or in bilingual contexts. Some guidance is provided for use in a number of tools with
widely varying levels of detail.
Guidance on differentiating between English as an Additional Language (EAL) and
language difficulties in early years settings are described in detail in Pert (2023). To
summarise, for a child who speaks or is exposed to more than one language to have
speech or language needs then they must have difficulties in both or all languages they
are exposed to. If a child enters a setting having been exposed to very little English, it will
take considerable time for them to learn English and 'catch up' with their monolingual
peers. If they are not experiencing difficulties in their home language(s) then the outlook
is very good and, given enough time and exposure to English within the early years and
school setting they will be able to build on the firm foundation of their home language
knowledge and become proficient in both languages.
To identify if a child has language needs in this context it is essential to ask families about
their child's language and communication at home and to monitor how a child's English
language progresses over time. If they are finding it more difficult than other children from
similar backgrounds or have difficulties in home language(s), then they should be referred
for speech and language therapy assessment. It is vital that professionals check about
home language development with parents rather than adopting a "wait and see" approach
which can lead to much later referrals to SLT for bilingual children with needs. Also, some
families who do not speak English may have no experience of speech and language
therapy services and may need support and reassurance to access these services (Pert,
2023).
48
Under no circumstances should families be encouraged to give up their home language.
Bilingualism brings social, cultural, and cognitive benefits. Valuing, reinforcing, and
raising the status of a child's home language within the early years setting will support
their home language development and, as a result, their English language development:
the more robust a child's first language development, the easier it is to acquire a second
language.
Using the language measures to determine support levels
In the language domain there are more 'fuzzy' boundaries between practitioners and
professionals in terms of their roles, skills, and knowledge in promoting language
development than for speech and stammering. However, this does not mean that
educational professionals can or should work in isolation to support children's language
at a universal or targeted level. The best outcomes are achieved when SLTs and
educational practitioners and services work together to understand the needs of the
children in a school/locality and develop models of collaborative work to meet those
needs.
A number of tools assign Red Amber Green (RAG) categories to children's scores,
mapping to specialist, targeted and universal support, respectively. Bandings in centile
scores are also often cited as a method for assigning children to RAG categories. A
centile score indicates a child's relative ability in comparison to other children. In a
representative sample of 100 children, if a child has a score at the 50th centile then there
would be 50 children with higher scores and 49 children with lower scores in the sample;
if a child has a score at the 10th centile there would be 90 children with a higher score
and 9 with a lower score and so on. RAG ratings are usually assigned as follows: Red for
less than or equal to the 10th percentile, Amber for the 11th to 16th percentile, and
Green for greater than the 16th percentile.
It is important to avoid assigning RAG ratings based solely on a single measure or cut
point, as this approach can lead to both under-identifying and over-identifying children in
need of support. This is due to the lack of fully comprehensive perfectly reliable and valid
measures, less than optimal sensitivity and specificity, changes in children's language
abilities over time and individual differences in the impact of language difficulties on a
child's social and educational participation and mental health.
Therefore, whilst the RAG bandings produced by assessment tools or centile scores are
indicative, they must be considered alongside other information, especially for children
falling just above or below cut points. These supplementary considerations include:
Observations of language and communication abilities in everyday activities to
judge whether the child's performance in the assessment represents their typical
abilities
49
Benchmarking tools in use within the setting
Progress over time: lack of progress indicating the need for a higher level of
support
Parent/caregiver reports of language and communication abilities at home, and
particularly any concerns.
Additional risk factors which make persisting difficulties more likely such as family
history of language or literacy difficulties; sex is male; being a younger sibling;
social disadvantage; socio-emotional and behavioural difficulties
Effects on the child's communicative participation in terms of social and
educational participation and social-emotional wellbeing: some children with
'milder' difficulties can be significantly affected.
For practitioners to be able to consider these factors, discussion with parents or
caregivers is essential. Discussion with other professionals would also support this
holistic approach such as with Health Visiting teams.
Furthermore, the age at which a child presents with lower language abilities affects the
degree to which we can be confident that a low score on a test indicates the need for
specialist referral. Local speech and language therapy referral pathways often detail
specific referral criteria at different ages and early years settings should work together
with their local speech and language therapy service to use this guidance effectively.
Universal
Due to the critical role of robust language development in children's educational
progress, high-quality, language-promoting, universal provision is vital for all children if
they are to reach their full potential. Furthermore, the lack of precision in identification
tools and the dynamic nature of children's early language development make this
provision more important. Identification of children with needs in this age range will
always be inexact, and so we need universal Quality First teaching to be available so that
any children who have language needs but are 'missed' will still benefit from language-
enriching environments, interactions, and opportunities.
Monitoring of children's language development over time in the early years is also vital,
addressing three issues. First, it tackles the volatility in language development to ensure
children who grow into and out of language difficulties receive the right level support.
Second, it provides a safety net for any children who may be missed by inexact
measures. Third, it enables practitioners to use children's response to support as an
additional indicator as to whether a child may need to move up the universal, targeted
and specialist levels of provision intensity. Children who do not benefit from high-quality
universal provision or targeted support as expected should have the level of support they
receive increased.
50
Targeted
Early years settings should use assessment tools in conjunction with the supplementary
considerations previously described to identify children who could benefit from targeted
support. This should include discussion with parents/caregivers.
Where moderate language difficulty is present, parents and caregivers are not overly
concerned, there are few additional risks present, and the child does not meet the criteria
for local speech and language therapy referral, then targeted support can be offered.
Also, targeted intervention can be provided when a child has been referred to speech
and language therapy and is waiting for assessment.
Such decisions are facilitated where settings have open channels of communication with
their local SLT to discuss children they are concerned or unsure about and agree
whether referral is appropriate or what to look out for in terms of progress that might
trigger a referral in the future. Such collaborative practices not only support decisions for
individual children but also build the capacity and confidence of practitioners to make
these nuanced, holistic decisions.
Specialist
Early years settings should use assessment tools in conjunction with the supplementary
considerations described to identify children who could benefit from specialist support.
When more significant language difficulties are present and are affecting a child's social
and educational participation, and the child is older than 36 months, specialist referral to
speech and language therapy is suggested (Bishop et al., 2016, 2017; Reilly et al.,
2015). When a child is younger than 36 months with more severe language difficulties,
practitioners may consider the supplementary considerations outlined previously and
local speech and language therapy referral criteria (McKean and Reilly, 2023; Reilly and
McKean, 2023; Law, Reilly and McKean, 2022). Research by Reilly et al. (2015), Brignell
et al. (2016), and Wilson et al. (2018) supports the immediate referral of children older
than 12 months to speech and language therapy when parents or caregivers express
significant concern, when children show limited gestures, responses to speech, or
understanding, or when there is a loss of previously acquired language or communication
skills. Early years settings and SLTs should discuss how to work together to support
children receiving specialist support. This may be delivered by practitioners under speech
and language therapy oversight, or it may be delivered directly by the speech and
language therapy service with the practitioner team, providing complementary support
perhaps as part of targeted intervention groups, adaptations to universal strategies and
additional practice.
Early years practitioners should also be familiar with other language enriching
opportunities for this age group which they should signpost families to in their local offer
such as Look, Say, Sing, Play groups or resources, Local Library shared story and rhyme
51
times, and speech and language therapy drop-in sessions (McKean et al., 2022, McKean
and Reilly, 2023).
These recommendations regarding how to determine the level of support provided are
based on a large body of research with respect to the nature of language trajectories and
risk factors for persisting language difficulties. It is beyond the scope of this report to
provide a detailed review and synthesis of this evidence. An evidence-based model of
surveillance and prevention is described in detail in McKean and Reilly (2023), and Reilly
and McKean (2023) and we refer readers to those publications. Further evidence
underpinning these suggestions can also be found in Bishop et al (2016, 2017), Law et al
(2017b), Law, Reilly, McKean (2022).
Conclusions
Although efforts were made to identify all relevant tools and publications to evaluate
those tools, within a rapid review framework some may be missed. Grey literature
sources evaluating the tools were not included; however, publishers and authors were
contacted to incorporate any evaluations available in the public domain. While we cannot
ensure complete comprehensiveness, this review is thought to consider the majority of
available tools and relevant available evidence.
The following conclusions represent the practical implications of the evidence described
and synthesised in the rapid review.
A holistic approach
Identification of children with stammering, speech, and language needs in this age
range (0-5) will always be inexact. Universal Quality First teaching is vital to
ensure that any children who have stammering, speech or language needs and
are 'missed' will still benefit from language-enriching environments, interactions,
and opportunities.
Monitoring children's speech and language development, including the
identification of needs such as stammering, is a core component of quality
universal provision.
A holistic approach to assessment, considering the following additional factors,
would support the identification of children with stammering, speech, or language
needs:
The child's communication in usual daily interactions;
Parents and caregivers' knowledge of the child;
The child's progress against usual developmental milestones;
52
How the child responds to additional support and their developmental
progress over time;
How any difficulties affect the child's participation and inclusion in
education, and social interaction;
The child's mental health and well-being;
The presence of additional risk factors; and
The views of other professionals who know the child and family.
The use of robust assessment tools, interpreted in conjunction with the holistic
knowledge described previously, is recommended to support valid and reliable
judgements about children's speech and language abilities and help identify those
who will benefit from targeted or specialist support. However, such tools are not
available for all aspects of stammering, speech, and language needs, or at all
ages.
Using a combination of different tools is likely necessary to address the diverse
needs of children in early years settings, to ensure that the most reliable tools are
utilised to best match the age and characteristics of the children in their care.
Familiarity with referral criteria and guidelines of local speech and language
therapy services will help support early years settings to identify and support
children with needs and mobilise available resource across the early years
workforce.
The development of clear and accessible referral criteria and guidance by speech
and language therapy service in partnership with local early years services and
health visitor teams will facilitate referral and collaborative processes.
A child's response to additional targeted support offers valuable insights regarding
the likely persistence and severity of their difficulties. Discussions between early
years settings and local speech and language therapy services regarding targeted
support will support monitoring of children to ensure they are referred to speech
and language therapy should they not make relevant progress.
Stammering
No validated or reliable measures were identified in this review that are currently
available for use by early years practitioners to assist in the identification of
stammering.
The WellComm tool offers a clear and helpful description of the overt speech
characteristics of stammering for practitioners, along with guidance as to when to
refer to an SLT. However, it has not been evaluated to determine whether the use
53
of its stammering guidelines result in appropriate identification or decisions
regarding onward referral.
Stammering can be reliably identified by early years practitioners and parents or
caregivers. However, children's stammering can be variable. If stammering is
noticed, it is important for early years practitioners to discuss with parents and
caregivers to explore their perceptions.
Reliability in identifying stammering can be improved via short training and
awareness-raising activities.
Specialist referral to speech and language therapy may be appropriate when
parents or caregivers are concerned; stammering is impacting a child's
confidence, ability to communicate or perceptions about their own speech; is
impacting their acceptance in their peer group; or the child has additional speech
and language needs.
Speech
Speech needs can be identified by considering how intelligible the child is to
others; whether they are using all the sounds expected for their age; and whether
any speech difficulties are having an impact on their self-confidence or likelihood
to participate in activities.
Five tools are available for assessing speech and phonological awareness in early
years settings, however, many lack comprehensive psychometric evaluation,
particularly in UK samples.
Research suggests that children who remain largely unintelligible to strangers by
age 3 years and 6 months, or whose speech is more than 50% unintelligible at
age 4, should be referred to speech and language therapy.
Specialist intervention is essential for all children with a speech sound disorder
(SSD). Targeted interventions may include phonological awareness interventions
but should not replace referral to speech and language therapy and should be
completed alongside SLT-led interventions.
Language
A greater number of assessment tools are available for children's language
development compared to speech and stammering. However, these tools vary in
age range, intended purpose and method of assessment. No one tool covers the
whole age range (0-5), and purposes required for implementing a tiered models
across the early years. The most effective approach combines multiple
assessment methods, contextualised with insights from early years practitioners
and caregivers.
54
The psychometric quality of language assessment tools varies widely. While some
tools, such as the Sure Start Language Measure (SSLM), demonstrate strong
accuracy in identifying needs, others lack robust validation, particularly in UK
populations. Tools such as the BPVS III, Infant/Reception Language Link, and
Language Screen are psychometrically robust and are useful at measuring
progress and response to intervention but their accuracy in identifying needs is
unclear. The review highlights the need for comprehensive, multi-method
assessment approaches rather than relying on a single tool or threshold.
Red, Amber Green (RAG) ratings or centile scores produced by any assessment
tools must be considered alongside holistic information, especially for children
falling just above or below cut points. This is due to less-than-optimal sensitivity
and specificity of tools, changes in children's language difficulties over time, and
individual differences in the impact of language difficulties on their social and
educational participation and mental health.
Research suggests referral to speech and language therapy for children aged 36
months or older with significant language difficulties that impact their daily
interactions. For children between 12 and 36 months, referral should be
considered if parents or caregivers express strong concerns, the child has limited
gestures, responses to speech, or understanding, or if previously acquired
language or communication skills have been lost. Additionally, referral is
appropriate when local speech and language therapy criteria are met, when a
child has made limited progress with targeted support, or when parents remain
highly concerned about their child's development.
Targeted support is suggested where moderate language difficulties are present,
when parents are not overly concerned, there are few additional risks present, and
the child does not meet the criteria for referral to the local speech and language
therapy service. When a child has been referred to speech and language therapy
but is waiting for assessment, targeted intervention can be provided.
Bilingual children
Discussion with parents and caregivers will enable practitioners to understand the
bilingual child's speech and language development in their home language and to
monitor progress. If no issues are present in the child's home language, then any
difficulties in English may relate to second language learning or EAL.
Parents and caregivers may find it difficult to make judgements as to whether their
child is developing typically in home language especially given that 'typical'
bilingual speech and language development differs from monolingual
development. A 'wait and see' approach is not recommended if there are concerns
and rather SLT advice sought.
55
Whether a child is intelligible to strangers who speak home language is a useful
indicator of SSD as for monolingual children, and a tool to formalise these
judgements is available in 66 languages (ICS). Consideration of the child's
communicative participation is also essential, as for monolingual children.
Stammering may be over-diagnosed in bilingual populations, so if stammering is
suspected, discussion with parents/caregivers and an SLT will be necessary to
understand whether the behaviours are stammering or more language based.
Training
For early years practitioners to be able to identify children with stammering,
speech or language needs, the provision of assessment tools is not sufficient. To
be able to interpret those assessments and synthesise the results with other key
information to make appropriate decisions, training is essential. Key components
for this include the nature and importance of stammering, speech, and language
needs; and partnerships with parents and caregivers.
Future research
Where tools are in widespread use and have high levels of face validity with practitioners
but have not been robustly evaluated with respect to their psychometric properties, a
programme of work to test and refine them using large representative UK samples and
up-to-date test development methods is suggested.
Similarly, tools which fill a specific gap in terms of age range or purpose, but with more
limited psychometric evaluation could also be developed and refined (GAPS, ICS,
Renfrew Bus Story, SOGS, SPAA-C, UK-CDI, UKBTAT). A priority setting exercise with
practitioners regarding key gaps to determine a programme of further development may
be beneficial.
Four tools, namely ECAT, NAPA, Progress checker, and Teddy Talk, did not report any
psychometric properties. Additionally, SPAA-C reports details regarding its use across
languages but reports no other psychometric properties. It is therefore difficult to have
confidence in their quality. Where they fill a gap (e.g. NAPA, SPAA-C) or are widely used
(e.g. ECAT) then work to evaluate their quality is recommended.
The development of training and resources to support practitioner judgements regarding
speech intelligibility, stammering and typical speech and language development, is
required with robust evaluation regarding how this feeds through to judgements regarding
level of needs.
A key consideration for the need for specialist referral is the degree to which the child's
stammering, speech or language needs affect their participation in education and social
56
relationships. This review did not find any measures suitable for practitioners to make
these judgements, highlighting an area for future research.
Whilst some tools have versions adapted for other languages (e.g. ICS, SPAA-C), only
one tool, the UKBAT, was found for bilingual children, highlighting a gap in the
development of reliable and validated tools for identifying and assessing speech,
language, and stammering needs in bilingual children. Additionally, no validated or
reliable measures were identified in this review that are currently available for use by
early years practitioners to assist in the identification of stammering, highlighting the need
for further research and development in this area to support early intervention efforts.
57
Work package 2: Intervention and support
Introduction
This work package aims to identify effective universal and targeted interventions that
early years practitioners can implement to support children's speech and language
development and address stammering, speech, and language needs. We define
universal and targeted interventions according to child need. Universal interventions are
designed to promote robust speech, language, and communication skills for all children.
Targeted interventions provide additional support for children who are at risk of speech
and language difficulties or are not meeting age-related expectations. These children
either do not require referral to speech and language therapy or an SLT has determined
that a targeted intervention is appropriate to meet their current needs. Early years
practitioners support children's speech and language development through universal and
targeted approaches and can work in partnership with SLTs to support specialist
interventions.
In addition to identifying universal and targeted interventions, the DfE requested that we
also consider what learning may be drawn from specialist-level interventions with respect
to the types of approaches which support children's speech and language development
or address stammering needs. When using the term approach, we mean an effective
component or technique used in the specialist intervention programmes.
Aims
Work package 2: Intervention and support aims to identify different universal and
targeted approaches for stammering, speech, and language needs by answering the
following research questions.
1. What universal and targeted approaches are effective at addressing stammering,
speech, and language needs in the early years?
2. What size of effects do these interventions provide?
3. What interventions are effective at different ages and with different types of
speech and language needs?
4. What learning may be drawn from specialist interventions regarding the
approaches which support children's speech and language development or
address stammering needs?
5. What recommendations for practice flow from this analysis to support early years
practitioners to select the most relevant intervention or approach?
Methods
Intervention studies were included in the review if they met the following inclusion criteria:
Were published in the
last 10 years (2013-2023) for language interventions
last 20 years (2004-2023) for speech interventions
last 20 years (2004-2023) for stammering interventions
Were a randomised controlled trail (RCT) or quasi-experimental design study
Relevant for children aged 0-5 (mean age less than 6 years old)
Published in English
Suitable for early years practitioners to deliver at the universal or targeted level
The differing date range for the types of need related to the paucity of available evidence.
Specialist interventions were also identified meeting the above criteria and analysed
separately to extract approaches which may be relevant to universal or targeted support.
The research team considered the practices embedded within specialist interventions
which, in their judgement, may be possible and safe for early years practitioners to apply.
However, these judgements require empirical evaluation and should be considered only
alongside guidance from an SLT. Detailed inclusion and exclusion criteria and the
broader rationale for the methods are described in the Methodology Report.
We have summarised the characteristics of the interventions using an adaptation of the
TIDieR framework (Hoffmann et al., 2014), the effects using the Education Endowment
Foundation (EEF) framework methods for interpreting effect sizes (Higgins et al., 2012)
and summarised study quality using the (Durán et al., 2016) framework adapted from
Cirrin and Gillam (2008) (Shobbrook et al., 2024).
It should be noted that many studies measure multiple outcomes. To summarise in the
tables and descriptions here we identify the outcomes with the largest effect, the smallest
effect and whether any outcomes were not affected by the intervention. We have
calculated effect sizes for all outcomes where reporting detail in the papers made this
possible and this detail can be found in the Supplementary Evidence Report.
When selecting interventions, practitioners should consider:
The level of evidence: We can have greater confidence in an RCT than in a quasi-
experimental study.
The quality of the evidence: We can have more confidence in a study where more
quality indicators are met, less in a study where indicators are not met or unclear.
59
The size of the effects: Larger effects or more months progress gained by children
as a result of the interventions are more desirable (Table 7). However, lower-
quality studies can often have larger effects. Therefore, practitioners should also
consider the quality of the evidence. A large effect with a low-quality study must be
interpreted cautiously. Months progress is taken from the EEF Teaching and
Learning Toolkit (Higgins et al., 2012) and must be interpreted cautiously.
The 'fit' of the intervention to the children: The intervention should bring about
improvements in the aspects of stammering, speech, or language needs for which
the children need support
The 'fit' of the intervention to the setting: The intervention should be deliverable by
staff in the setting, considering skills, knowledge, capacity, and resources. Settings
should ensure any gaps in these are addressed to enable successful
implementation.
Table 7. Effect size table and corresponding months of progress and impact
Effect sizes (Hedges' g)
Progress (months)
Impact
-0.05-0.05
0
No or very low
0.06-0.18
1-2
Low
0.19-0.44
3-5
Moderate
0.45-0.69
6-8
High
0.70-1.00
9-12
Very high
1.00+
More than 12
Very high
Findings
Our searches did not identify any universal or targeted interventions that early years
practitioners can use specifically to support children who stammer. However, we found
two speech-related intervention approaches (key components of broader intervention
programmes) suitable for delivery at the universal or targeted level by practitioners.
Additionally, we identified 16 language interventions.
We also identified 34 specialist intervention studies: 9 for stammering, 16 for speech, and
9 for language. From these, we extracted approaches which may be relevant to early
years practitioner practice, appropriate for non-specialist delivery, at the universal and
targeted levels, including 9 stammering approaches, 2 for speech, and 7 for language.
It is important to note that the use of specialist-led interventions as universal or targeted
interventions must be considered with caution. For many, we were not able to identify
60
research that these approaches are also beneficial when delivered by early years
practitioners or that they would benefit children without diagnosed needs i.e. that they
would benefit a universal population in the same way as they would a child with
difficulties. However, some elements of specialist approaches are also evident in
universal and targeted studies reviewed here.
The universal, targeted and specialist interventions found from our search are discussed
in relation to stammering, then speech, and finally language.
Stammering
No universal or targeted interventions that early years practitioners can use specifically to
support children who stammer were found in this review. However, resources identified
through expert advice from specialists at the Michael Palin Centre for Stammering that
may be useful for early years practitioners to support children who stammer include:
The Michael Palin Centre for Stammering Resources for teachers, with information
about stammering and how to respond when a child or young person is
stammering.
The Michael Palin Centre video entitled "Wait wait I'm not finished yet", a video
guide for the educational workforce.
A Guide To Stammering: For Teachers, by the charity STAMMA. This is a guide
for how primary and secondary school teachers can support children who
stammer. This is focused on teachers rather than early years settings.
Video for parents and caregivers entitled 7 Tips for Talking with the Child Who
Stutters from the Stuttering Foundation, a non-profit organisation helping those
who stutter (stutteringhelp.org)
Three specialist interventions were identified that may inform early years practitioner
practice. These interventions require specialist training, but there are elements of two (de
Sonneville-Koedoot et al., 2015, Millard et al., 2009) that promote communication styles
thought to be helpful for children who stammer who are aged 0-5. Nine strategies that
may be included in support for children who stammer, and their parents/carers, which
could be implemented by early years practitioners are reported in Table 8, along with the
age range where they have been used effectively as part of a specialist intervention. The
effectiveness of these individual strategies, outside of the specialist therapy package
delivered in its entirety are supported by SLT expert opinion (Cozart and Wilson, 2022)
rather than by empirical evidence.
Importantly these are approaches and strategies for communication rather than
stammering intervention packages and are limited in terms of available evidence as to
their effectiveness. While, by their nature, they are unlikely to cause harm if delivered by
61
early years practitioners rather than specialists, they must be applied with advice and
guidance from a SLT. Further research is needed to check their effectiveness empirically.
Table 8. Specialist stammering approaches or techniques, along with their
applicable age ranges in the pre-school years and potential level of support
Specialist approach or technique
Age range (years)
Level of support
Increase knowledge and
1-5
Universal; Targeted
understanding
Reduce the pace of speaking
1-5
Universal; Targeted
Listen and respond
1-5
Universal; Targeted
Encourage turn-taking
1-5
Universal; Targeted
Be patient and acknowledge
1-5
Universal; Targeted
difficulty
Do not correct stammering
1-5
Universal; Targeted
Build confidence
1-5
Universal; Targeted
Clear rules and boundaries
1-5
Universal; Targeted
Explore pattern and caregiver
1-5
Universal; Targeted
perspective and engage in shared
decision-making about support
Approaches and strategies from specialist interventions to support children who
stammer:
Increase knowledge and understanding about stammering: There is existing
evidence that watching the following video by the Michael Palin Centre entitled
"Wait wait I'm not finished yet" increased teachers' knowledge and confidence
(Hearne et al., 2020).
Reduce the pace, speak in an unhurried way, and pause frequently: This strategy
gives the child more time to think about what they want to say, and to say what
they want to say.
Give the child time: Allow the child to finish what they are trying to say, without
rushing or correcting them. It can be helpful for the child to be relaxed while
speaking and not under time pressure.
Listening fully: Respond to what the child is saying, not how they are saying it.
Focus on content. Give the child your attention, focus on the message, show you
are listening non-verbally. It is acceptable to let the child know when you do not
have time to listen.
62
Encourage turn-taking in the environment, both verbally and nonverbally: When a
child understands that they will get their turn, it enables them to relax, take the
time they need, and give and take turns in conversation.
Asking questions: Ask one question at a time, give plenty of time to respond,
balance the questioning with commenting.
One-to-one play time: One-to-one time ensures the child experiences
communication in a relaxed, non-competitive situation, with the adult's full
attention, listening and focus.
Acknowledging difficulties: If a child is clearly struggling or distressed while
stammering, acknowledge that sometimes talking can be difficult, you are
listening, and they can take their time while you will wait.
Do not correct stammered speech or ask the child to repeat what they are saying
fluently: It is important not to convey a message that stammering is negative or
undesirable as this could lead the child trying to hide their stammer (by avoiding
speaking, changing words, developing tension) or developing negative views of
themselves as communicators.
Building confidence: Praise the child's strengths and attempts they make to try
new things or build skills.
Encourage the child to continue to communicate and participate in all their usual
speaking contexts.
Rules and discipline should be the same for children who stammer as other
children: Sometimes parents/caregivers or teachers are worried that they will
increase the stammering, because children may stammer more if upset or angry,
but having clear rules and boundaries is helpful and important for children who
stammer.
Involve parents and caregivers: Explore parent and caregiver perspectives,
concerns and experiences and engage in shared decision-making as to the most
appropriate form of support, referral or speech and language therapy advice.
Speak with parents and caregivers about whether they have noticed stammering,
whether they are concerned, and whether they have noticed if the child is upset,
avoiding speaking, or changing words. Discuss with the parents and caregivers
whether they would like advice from a SLT and, if so, refer to an SLT. If parents
are not concerned and the child is unaware or unimpacted by the stammering, a
period of monitoring can be appropriate, since stammering often resolves itself.
In summary, the overall lack of evidence of universal and targeted interventions for
stammering means there is a clear evidence gap.
63
Support for bilingual children who stammer
There is no clear guidance for bilingual children who stammer. Specialist stammering
interventions have been successfully adapted from English for use in other languages
(e.g. de Sonneville-Koedoot et al. (2015)) suggesting the strategies identified can be
used for speakers of Languages Other Than English (LOTE). As far as we are aware,
there is no evidence that the strategies extracted from specialist interventions
summarised could be detrimental for bilingual children. However cross-cultural variability
in interaction qualities between adults and children require sensitive consideration. There
is no evidence that bilingual children are any more or less likely to stammer, although the
stammer may present differently in the different languages due to levels of skill and
language requirements in different contexts. This point and the specialist evidence
reviewed underscores the need to work closely with parents and caregivers. Practitioners
need to ensure their communications with families who are bilingual are accessible,
inclusive, and culturally sensitive.
Speech
Two interventions that early years practitioners can use to support speech difficulties
were found in this review: Phonological Awareness Training and Speech Recasts (Table
9). As in Work Package 1: Identification and assessment, phonological awareness has
been considered within the speech section of Work Package 2.
Table 9. Applicable age ranges in the pre-school years and the level of support for
speech interventions
Intervention
Age (years)
Level of support
Phonological Awareness Intervention
3-5
Universal; Targeted
Speech Recasts
3-5
Targeted
Phonological awareness intervention
Phonological awareness refers to the conscious awareness of, and ability to, manipulate
or play with sounds in spoken words. Phonological awareness is often an area of need
for children with SSD and is delayed in about half to three quarters of English-speaking
children with SSD (Broomfield and Dodd, 2004, Rvachew and Grawburg, 2006). A delay
is particularly likely if children make structural errors in their speech, such as missing off
sounds (Rvachew, 2007), if they make atypical errors not seen in the speech of typically
developing children, or if they have poor vocabulary skills (Preston and Edwards, 2010).
Phonological awareness difficulties are persistent over time in SSD (Preston et al., 2013),
and place children at risk for low early literacy skills (Rvachew, 2007). Phonological
awareness is a key foundational skill for early literacy as learning the alphabetic principle
64
requires children to segment words and flexibly link sounds to abstract symbols.
Phonological awareness skill predicts early reading progress for all children (Hogan et
al., 2005). Low phonological awareness skill predicts low literacy skill in children with
SSD, particularly for children whose SSD persists to school entry (Hayiou-Thomas et al.,
2017).
Phonological awareness intervention for children with SSD effectively improves
phonological awareness skills (Roth et al., 2006) and supporting phonological awareness
skills in this group improves their literacy outcomes. This appears to hold for all children.
Indeed, one UK study found that whole class intervention through Reception and Year 1
reduced the incidence of reading difficulties from 20% in comparison schools to 5%
(Shapiro and Solity, 2008), suggesting phonological awareness input is a valuable
universal tool through the Reception year.
Phonological awareness intervention has been used with children aged 3-5 years who
have SSD as part of successful interventions measuring speech outcomes for children
(Gillon, 2005, Tyler et al., 2011) however evidence is not yet available that phonological
awareness training is an active ingredient in these interventions (Denne et al., 2005).
Certainly though, phonological awareness intervention is a key part of the toolbox for
SLTs working with children who have SSD in the UK (Hegarty et al., 2018, Lancaster et
al., 2010, Joffe and Pring, 2008, Roulstone et al., 2012) as well as other English-
speaking countries such as the USA (Brumbaugh and Smit, 2013) and Australia (McLeod
and Baker, 2014, Furlong et al., 2021).
Phonological awareness intervention aims to enhance children's awareness of speech
sounds, supporting both speech production and early literacy. Activities include syllable
identification, rhyming tasks, and phoneme-level exercises such as sound detection,
categorisation, and isolation. Interventions for children with SSD are based on Gillon's
Phonological Awareness Training Programme (Gillon, 2008), Gillon's Integrated
Phonological Awareness programme (Gillon and McNeil, 2007) or the Newcastle
Intervention for Phonological Awareness (Stringer, 2019). While early years practitioners
commonly support phonological awareness in structured phonics programmes, their role
in delivering these interventions requires formal evaluation.
Interventions can be delivered face-to-face, individually or in small groups (2-3 children),
across various settings, including early years settings. Delivery schedules in trials ranged
from 90 minutes weekly for eight weeks (Denne, 2005), to two 45-minute sessions
weekly for two or three 6-week blocks (Gillon, 2005), and 60-minute sessions twice a
week over 12 weeks (Tyler, 2011).
Evidence from two moderate-to-good quality studies (one RCT and one matched-
subjects study), both with small sample sizes, suggests that phonological awareness
intervention for children with SSDs has the greatest impact on overall phonological
65
awareness¹ with a very high impact. However, its effect on improving speech accuracy is
less clear (Denne et al., 2005).
For full evidence appraisal of quality criteria and summary effect sizes for phonological
awareness intervention, please refer to Table B. 1. Evidence appraisal for Phonological
Awareness intervention in Appendix B and Table C. 1. Calculated effect sizes using
Hedges' g for Phonological Awareness intervention in Appendix C.
Speech Recasts
Speech recasts are used to support children with SSDs by enhancing their awareness of
speech and providing clear models of target pronunciation. Evidence supporting this
technique demonstrates its effectiveness as a targeted intervention for children with
SSDs and expressive language difficulties. Speech recasts could be integrated into daily
interactions or used intentionally as a targeted intervention during specific activities, such
as shared book reading or one-on-one play.
The included evidence for this approach comes from a study by Yoder et al. (2005), who
ran an RCT measuring the effect of the intervention on mean length of utterance and
speech intelligibility. Yoder et al. (2005) examined speech and language recasts in
children aged 3 to 5 years old.
A speech recast occurs when an adult responds to a child's speech with a near imitation
that maintains the original word order, word endings, and vocabulary but provides a clear
speech model (Camarata, 1996). For example, if a child says, "This a wion [lion]," the
adult might respond, "Yes, a lion" (Yoder et al., 2005). In the study, children in the
intervention group participated in child-led, one-on-one play sessions with an
interventionist three times a week for six months. When a child's utterance was
understood but poorly articulated, the interventionist responded with a speech recast.
Results showed a positive group-level improvement in speech accuracy, particularly
among children with lower pre-treatment speech scores (Arizona Articulation Proficiency
Score below 46). Speech recasts are widely recommended in speech and language
guidance, including resources from Speech and Language UK and the New South Wales
government in Australia (McLeod et al., 2020). While the trial was conducted by trained
interventionists, this strategy could also be implemented by early years practitioners with
appropriate training. Speech recasts require no additional materials and can be delivered
face-to-face in any setting, including early years settings. The Yoder et al. (2005) study
structured interactions around toys, tailoring the intervention to the child's interests.
1 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.87; very high impact; +10 months progress.
66
Although the trial followed a structured schedule of three 30-minute sessions per week
for six months, speech recasts can be integrated more flexibly into daily interactions.
Evidence from a good-quality RCT (Yoder et al., 2005) with a small sample size suggests
that when delivered as a targeted intervention, speech recasts significantly improved
intelligibility over time, based on author-designed measures. However, this effect was
only observed in children with low pre-treatment intelligibility. While the study does not
provide sufficient data to calculate effect size, it reports a weak-to-moderate overall effect
on intelligibility, including for children with higher pre-treatment intelligibility scores. Full
evidence appraisal of the quality criteria for speech recasts is in Table B. 2. Evidence
appraisal for Speech Recasts intervention in Appendix B.
Evidence summary of universal and targeted interventions for speech
In summary, for speech interventions, there is moderate-to-good quality evidence that
phonological awareness intervention supports the development of phonological
awareness in children with speech sound disorders with low-to-very high effects.
Additionally, there is good quality evidence that recasting the speech of children with
speech sound disorders positively impacts intelligibility. Both interventions are readily
available to practitioners for use as these approaches either require no materials (speech
recasts) or materials that are readily available to practitioners for free (phonological
awareness intervention).
Support for bilingual children's speech
Regarding support for bilingual children, the evidence for the universal and targeted
interventions for speech previously discussed (speech recasts and phonological
awareness intervention) are drawn from research conducted with samples of monolingual
English-speaking children (or a vast majority of monolingual English-speaking children).
Based on this, we cannot say that these techniques have proven efficacy for bilingual
populations. Notably, phonological awareness development shows considerable
sensitivity to the structure of individual spoken languages (Anthony and Francis, 2005,
Caravolas and Bruck, 1993) such that bilingual children may show different patterns of
strength and need to their monolingual peers. As far as we are aware, there is no
evidence that these interventions could be detrimental for bilingual children.
Phonological awareness intervention benefits in home language may transfer to English,
although the evidence regarding transfer is not definitive and may depend on the nature
of the home language (Soto et al., 2019). However, there is evidence that phonological
awareness intervention in home language is not detrimental to English phonological
awareness (Soto et al., 2019). In order to support speech and language development in
home language and in English and hence retain the cultural, linguistic and cognitive
benefits of bilingualism (Pert and Bradley, 2018), current evidence would suggest
phonological awareness intervention for bilingual children with speech needs be provided
67
in both or all languages (Pert, 2023). However, further research is also needed to
robustly evaluate effective targeted support for bilingual children's speech.
Learning from specialist speech interventions
Sixteen specialist interventions for speech were identified (Allen, 2013; Baker and
McLeod, 2004; Bellon-Harn et al., 2004; Combiths et al., 2019; Crosbie et al., 2005;
Dodd et al., 2008; Hart and Gonzalez, 2010; Lancaster et al., 2010; McIntosh and Dodd,
2009; Namasivayam et al., 2021; Rvachew and Matthews, 2019; Smit et al., 2018; Tyler
et al., 2006; Rudolph and Wendt, 2014; Flint and Ingham, 2005; Tyler and Lewis, 2005).
Two approaches and strategies from specialist interventions to support children with SSD
are discussed, namely auditory bombardment and contrast word procedures. Table 10
provides an overview of these approaches and the age range where they have been
used effectively as a specialist intervention. These approaches may be suitable for use
by early years practitioners, alongside guidance from an SLT and compassionate
consideration of each child's individual needs and wellbeing. Their use at universal or
targeted levels requires empirical testing.
Table 10. Specialist speech approaches or techniques, along with their age range
within the pre-school years and appropriate level of support for potential non-
specialist delivery
Specialist approach or technique
Age range (years)
Level of support
Auditory bombardment
3-5
Targeted
Contrast word procedures
3-5
Targeted
Auditory bombardment
More often than not the origin of a child's SSD is unknown. SSDs can result from
difficulties at one or more points in the speech processing and production system, from
hearing impairments through to difficulties controlling the muscles of the mouth. Many
children with SSD have difficulty accurately representing the sounds of speech in the
brain (see Farquharson, 2015 for a review of aetiology).
In a recent systematic review and meta-analysis of studies with children aged 3 to 6 with
an SSD of unknown origin, 60 out of 73 studies found some or all children to have a
difficulty with speech perception tasks (Hearnshaw et al., 2019). Hearnshaw et al.
included a meta-analysis of eight studies that compared children with SSD to typically
developing children on tasks where they had to judge whether a sound or word was
correctly produced. In all eight studies, the SSD group performed more poorly on these
judgement tasks, with seven studies finding a significant difference (Hedge's g = 1.110).
68
Given the perceptual difficulties faced by children with SSD, it is not surprising that many
specialist interventions include an element of speech perception work (Dodd et al., 2008,
Lancaster et al., 2010, Rvachew and Matthews, 2019). Activities may include asking
children to judge which of two words the SLT has said or asking the child to judge if the
SLT has said a word correctly or not. The child then receives immediate, clear feedback
to support learning.
Activities that target speech perception are a standard component of specialist support
even if not explicitly discussed in research studies. An important element of these
activities is that they require the child to listen, but they make no or minimal demands on
production. Speech perception activities may also be part of computerised therapy. For
example, the Speech Assessment and Interactive Learning System (SAILS) app is a set
of listening games developed and evaluated in Canada (Rvachew et al., 1999, Rvachew
et al., 2004) which requires children to respond whether a target word has been
produced correctly or not. Similar listening games, targeted at the specific speech errors
the child makes, are included in SpeechLink.
A key element of SSD interventions is to simply provide children with the opportunity to
listen to words that include the speech sounds they find difficult. This technique is called
'Auditory Bombardment (or 'focused stimulation') and is explicitly stated as being used in
several specialist interventions (c.f. Supplementary Evidence Report) (Hart and
Gonzalez, 2010, Lancaster et al., 2010, Tyler et al., 2011, Rudolph and Wendt, 2014,
Tyler and Lewis, 2005). We also know from survey studies that this type of perceptual
training is used as part of speech sound intervention by UK SLTs (Hegarty et al., 2018,
Roulstone et al., 2012).
In Hart & Gonzalez (2010), the adult and child engaged in joint storybook reading, with
the adult modelling words for the child that included the sound(s) that that child found
difficult. In this case, the story books were designed specifically to target those difficult
sounds, but this activity could equally be done with published storybooks that use
character names or themes that include a child's target sounds. This seemingly simple
technique is important as children with SSD who undergo perceptual training are better
able to learn to use those speech sounds (Shiller and Rochon, 2014). Rvachew and
Matthews (2019) state that perceptual training can 'sharpen knowledge of the auditory
target' (p.3185).
In early years settings, supporting children to listen to the speech sounds they find
difficult to produce or use correctly can be integrated into everyday activities such as
sharing books or play. Shared book reading using stories with tricky sounds is a
particularly useful tool for targeted support if children are known to have difficulties with a
specific sound. Children's tricky sounds should be modelled naturally and not
exaggerated.
69
Contrast word procedures
The idea of contrast words uses the same principle as most specialist interventions for
SSD; the idea that speech sounds allow children to make contrasts between words with
different meanings, like 'cat' and 'hat'. Intervention techniques draw children's attention to
sound contrasts by asking them to produce words that would lose their meaning if a
speech sound were made in error. For example, you cannot produce the 'k' sound as a
'h' if you want to contrast the word 'cat' with the word 'hat' in a game.
In specialist interventions, this is known as phonological contrast therapy. A similar
technique, known as the contrast word procedure (Bellon-Harn et al., 2004, Hart and
Gonzalez, 2010) may be suitable for use in early years settings as it is similar to the
techniques early years practitioners use in broader teaching and learning. However, this
assertion needs to be tested empirically. The contrast word procedure is structured
around child-led play or shared book reading. When the child makes a speech sound
error, but the adult knows the target word, the adult models two words to give the child an
opportunity to address the communication breakdown. For example, if the child says,
'The boy has a bite', the adult might say 'Oh yes, well spotted! But is it a bite or a bike?'.
Importantly, if the child is unable to correct their error, the adult simply gives them praise
and models the target word.
In the Hart & Gonzalez (2010) study, SLTs engaged in child-led play and shared book
reading. They used a combination of contrast words and auditory bombardment to model
and cue key words for the child. In Bellon-Harn et al., (2004), sessions were again
structured around shared book reading. When children made speech sound errors, the
interventionist provided the child with the error form and the intended form, to give them
an opportunity to make meaning clear.
The use of contrast words adopts all the theoretical underpinnings of phonological
contrast therapy. Importantly though, it allows early years practitioners to work in a child-
led way whenever the timetable allows for one-to-one contact and allows for support to
be structured around books and activities that the child finds motivating. This approach
must be handled sensitively, and children must not be asked to repeat or correct their
attempts. If the child shows any signs of frustration the approach is inappropriate for the
child at that time.
Language
Sixteen universal and/or targeted interventions to support language in the early years
were identified in this review, listed in Table 11.
70
Table 11. Applicable age ranges in the pre-school years and the level of support for
language interventions
Intervention
Age (years)
Level of support
Bridge Made of Stories (Spencer et al.,
4-5
Targeted
2020)
Developing Talkers (Zucker et al.,
4-5
Universal; Targeted
2013, Zucker et al., 2019)
Dialogic Reading for Mathematical
3-5
Universal
Language (Purpura et al., 2017)
Early Talk Boost (Reeves et al., 2018)
3-5
Targeted
Educator-Implemented Storybook
4-5
Targeted
Vocabulary Intervention (Vuattoux et
al., 2014)
Explicit Vocabulary Instruction
5
Universal
(Damhuis et al., 2014)
Happy Talk (Frizelle et al., 2021)
0-5
Targeted
Literate Language Intervention (Phillips
3-5
Targeted
et al., 2016)
Nuffield Early Language Intervention
4-5
Targeted
(NELI) (West et al., 2021, Fricke et al.,
2013a, Fricke et al., 2013b)
NELI Preschool (West et al., 2024)
3-4
Universal; Targeted
Play and Language Intervention
1-3
Universal
(Conner et al., 2014)
Preparing Pequeños (Landry et al.,
3-5
Targeted
2019)
Read Aloud (Silverman et al., 2013)
3-5
Targeted
Shared Book Reading with Gameplay
4-5
Universal
(Hassinger-Das et al., 2016)
Story Friends (Kelley et al., 2020,
3-5
Targeted
Kelley et al., 2015)
Talk Boost (Lee and Pring, 2016)
3-5
Targeted
Two interventions that early years practitioners can use to deliver both universal and
targeted support to children with language difficulties were found in this review:
Developing Talkers and Nuffield Early Language Intervention (NELI) Preschool. A further
71
four interventions were found designed for universal delivery, namely Dialogic Reading
for Mathematical Language; Explicit Vocabulary Instruction; Play and Language
Intervention; and Shared Booking Reading with Gameplay. In terms of interventions
intended for targeted delivery, 10 interventions were found: Bridge Made of Stories; Early
Talk Boost; Educator-Implemented Storybook Vocabulary Intervention; Happy Talk;
Literate Language Intervention; Nuffield Early Language Intervention (NELI); Preparing
Pequeños; Read Aloud; Story Friends; and Talk Boost. The following describes
interventions available for both universal and targeted support, then universal delivery
only and finally targeted delivery only. For each intervention we describe the approach,
summarise the study findings and appraise the study quality.
Universal and targeted support
Developing Talkers
The Developing Talkers programme is designed to be used by early years practitioners
to deliver universal and targeted support to children aged 4-5 years using repeated
shared book reading experiences. The intervention is delivered daily over 26 weeks, via
whole-class (Tier 1) and small-group (Tier 2) sessions. Evidence for Developing Talkers
comes from two RCTs conducted in the USA (Zucker et al 2019; Zucker et al 2013), in
which early years practitioners delivered the programme. These studies measured the
intervention's impact on expressive and receptive vocabulary as well as listening
comprehension. However, further research is needed to determine its generalisability to
the UK context.
The intervention focuses on three key areas: academic vocabulary instruction, inferential
questioning, and comprehension skills. Lesson delivery included 26 trade books (half
narrative and half informational genres) each read three times in whole-group, tier 1
Shared Book Reading sessions. Additional activities extend or reinforce learning in small-
group, tier 2 settings. Interactive teaching strategies involve picture vocabulary cards
introduced before reading and verbal elaborations during reading. Books include literal
and inferential questions, embedded within the text using stickers, and guide discussion.
In the initial weeks, teachers reinforce seven comprehension skills through pre-reading
guiding questions. Additional optional tier 1 activities, such as retelling, drawing, and
writing, further support comprehension.
Tier 2, targeted intervention, involves eighty extensions, designed to deepen knowledge
of selected high-mileage vocabulary words or concepts. These activities use five 5
strategies: (1) categorisation of picture cards as a concept sort; (2) examples/non-
examples vocabulary picture sorts; (3) acting out vocabulary; (4) asking questions about
vocabulary with pictures; and (5) expressive tasks for practicing complex grammar/syntax
(e.g., morphemes, pronouns, plurals).
72
The Developing Talkers programme is delivered by teachers in a classroom setting,
using books, picture vocabulary cards, and stickers as key materials. It is implemented
face-to-face, with whole-group (tier 1) sessions and small-group (tier 2) sessions. Tier 1
consists of daily 20-minute sessions, while tier 2 provides additional 12-minute sessions
for small groups of 3-4 children, delivered over 26 weeks. No individual tailoring is
reported, and programme fidelity is monitored using a checklist to track the presence or
absence of tier 1 and tier 2 components.
Evidence from two moderate-to-good quality RCTs with large sample sizes suggests that
Developing Talkers has its highest effect on taught receptive vocabulary for both
universal and targeted delivery² (Zucker, 2019). The lowest effect was found for
'exposure-only' vocabulary³ (words encountered in the texts but not explicitly taught),
both based on author-designed outcomes (Zucker, 2019). Effects were strongest for
children aged 5-6 years compared to children aged 4-5 years. However, no significant
effects were found on standardised measures of vocabulary naming, expressive
vocabulary, listening comprehension, or vocabulary fluency (Zucker, 2013; Zucker,
2019). Additionally, a negative effect on vocabulary fluency was observed for children
when delivered universally, with the control group scoring higher than the intervention
group. For full evidence appraisal of quality criteria and calculated effect sizes for the
Developing Talkers intervention, please refer to Table B. 3. Evidence appraisal for
Developing Talkers intervention in Appendix B and Table C. 2. Calculated effect sizes
using Hedges' g for Developing Talkers intervention in Appendix C, respectively.
Nuffield Early Language Intervention (NELI) Preschool
NELI Preschool is a 20-week scripted language programme that consists of both
universal (whole-class) and targeted components for children aged 3-4 years. The
programme is designed to enrich children's vocabulary and develop their narrative and
active listening skills. It combines class-based language instruction for all children with
additional targeted support in small group and individual sessions for children with
language difficulties. Evidence for NELI Preschool comes from one UK study in which the
intervention is delivered by early years practitioners (West et al., 2024). The study is a
rigorous randomised controlled trial measuring the effects of intervention on oral
language, vocabulary, and grammar.
The programme revolves around 20 pre-reading books, with a new book introduced each
week. It is implemented face-to-face, with daily whole-class sessions lasting 15-20
minutes. Children identified for targeted support participate in three small-group sessions
(10-15 minutes each) and one individual session (10 minutes) per week. These sessions
2 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.84; very high impact; +10 months progress.
3 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.43; moderate impact; +5 months progress.
73
focus on vocabulary development and narrative skills, encouraging children to retell
aspects of the stories. The NELI Preschool programme is delivered by teachers in an
early years setting. Training and support for teaching assistants are provided by SLTs
and specialist teachers to ensure effective implementation.
Evidence for the NELI Preschool intervention is from one good quality RCT with a large
sample size (West et al., 2024). For children receiving the universal intervention the
study indicates that the intervention has its highest effect on oral language skills⁴ and
lowest effect on grammar⁵. When delivered as a targeted intervention for children with
lower language scores at the start of the study, the highest effect was for listening
comprehension⁶ with only a moderate effect and its lowest for grammar⁷ and expressive
vocabulary⁸ with very low effects based on standardised assessment. For full evidence
appraisal of quality criteria and calculated effect sizes for the NELI Preschool
intervention, please refer to Table B. 4. Evidence appraisal for NELI preschool
intervention in Appendix B and Table C. 3. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for
NELI Preschool intervention in Appendix C, respectively.
A further fifteen additional effect sizes were reported across various outcomes, with
seven moderate (including universal expressive vocabulary, receptive vocabulary,
grammar, global language, and listening comprehension, and targeted grammar and
narrative), seven low (including universal expressive vocabulary and grammar, and
targeted expressive vocabulary, receptive vocabulary, narrative, global language, and
grammar), and one very low (targeted expressive vocabulary). For further details, see the
Supplementary Evidence Report.
Universal support
Dialogic Reading for Mathematical Language
Dialogic Reading is a universal approach that is widely used to support children's
language learning. This intervention uses a dialogic reading framework to focus on terms,
concepts, and pictures that involve mathematical language for children. Included
evidence for Dialogic Reading for Mathematical Language comes from a USA-based
study in which the intervention is delivered by early years practitioners (Purpura et al
2017). The study is a RCT that measures the effects of the intervention on expressive
and receptive vocabulary, with a particular focus on mathematical. As the study was
4 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.51; high impact; +6 months progress.
5 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.01, very low impact; 0 months progress.
6 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.37; moderate impact; +5 months progress.
7 Effects size is Hedge' g = 0.02; very low impact; 0 months progress.
8 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.02; very low impact; 0 months progress.
74
conducted in the USA, further research is required to establish its generalisability to the
UK context.
This intervention is based on evidence showing a strong relationship between
mathematics and language development in young children. It is designed for children
aged 3-5 years and employs a dialogic reading framework to teach mathematical
language and explore the connections between mathematical knowledge and
vocabulary. The rationale behind this intervention is that mathematical curricula that are
rich in interaction are thought to be effective in improving both mathematical and
language skills. By integrating mathematical language into daily conversations and
storybook reading, the intervention aims to enhance children's understanding of
mathematical concepts alongside their language skills.
Children participate in the intervention in small groups, where early years practitioners
read with the children using established strategies from prior research. Specifically, the
PEER (Prompt, Evaluate, Expand, and Repeat) strategy and CROWD (Completion,
Recall, Open-ended, Wh- [what, where, why], and Distancing) prompts are employed
during the reading sessions.
Before the intervention begins, practitioners work together to develop a series of
questions that are written on note cards. These questions are placed at specific points in
each book and are designed to incorporate mathematical language. The questions are
intended to either expand upon the existing mathematical language in the story (e.g.,
"How do we know the girl has more than the boys?") or to introduce new mathematical
concepts where the book may not have provided them (e.g., "Is the bird above or below
the tree?").
As the sessions progress, the prompts become more complex, allowing the children to
explore more advanced mathematical language. The process starts with basic questions
and simple mathematical comments but gradually deepens to include more challenging
discussions and distancing strategies, such as asking children to relate the book's
scenarios to their own lives. Practitioners ask these questions at the same points in each
book, which helps to reinforce children's understanding of mathematical concepts.
The Dialogic reading intervention uses six books and note cards with questions and
prompts to be delivered by early years practitioners in early years settings. Sessions are
conducted face-to-face in groups, with 16-24 sessions lasting 15-20 minutes each, held
2-3 days a week over 8 weeks, totalling approximately 5-8 hours. The intervention follows
a set framework, with no specific tailoring for individual children. Fidelity of
implementation is monitored by randomly selecting about 33% of the interventionist's
audio-recorded sessions to assess whether the preidentified questions and mathematical
language are used correctly. The fidelity results for each interventionist show high
75
adherence⁹, indicating that the intervention was generally delivered as intended, with
some variation across different practitioners.
Evidence for Dialogic Reading for Mathematical Language is from one good quality RCT
with small sample size (Purpura, 2017). The study indicates that the intervention has a
high effect on receptive vocabulary¹⁰, based on author-designed assessment suggesting
the targeted vocabulary is learned well. There was no significant effect of the intervention
on expressive vocabulary, which was measured using standardised assessment,
suggesting limited generalisation of learning. For full evidence appraisal of quality criteria
and calculated effect sizes for the Dialogic Reading for Mathematical Language
intervention, please see Table B. 5. Evidence appraisal for Dialogic Reading for
Mathematical Language intervention in Appendix B and Table C. 4. Calculated effect
sizes using Hedges' g for Dialogic Reading for Mathematical Language intervention in
Appendix C, respectively.
Explicit Vocabulary Instruction
Explicit Vocabulary Instruction is a universal approach designed for children aged 5-7
years, providing direct instruction on vocabulary learning through storybook reading. The
intervention focuses on explaining the defining characteristics of target words. Evidence
for this approach comes from a RCT conducted in the Netherlands (Damhuis et al.,
2014), where the intervention was delivered by the researcher and measured its effect on
receptive vocabulary. As the study was conducted outside the UK, further research is
needed to assess its generalisability to the UK context.
Delivered in small groups of 3-4 children, the intervention introduces 17 words using
explicit instruction, where each word is defined through three sentences and reinforced
with a single picture from a picture book. The intervention takes place in a classroom
setting, delivered face-to-face by researchers over eight sessions across two weeks, with
each session lasting 20-30 minutes. No specific tailoring for individual children is
reported, and there is no documented fidelity assessment to determine whether the
intervention is consistently implemented as intended.
Evidence for Explicit Vocabulary Instruction comes from a low-to-moderate quality RCT
with a small sample size (Damhuis, 2014). The study indicates that the intervention has
its highest effect on breadth of vocabulary¹¹ and lowest effect on depth of vocabulary¹²,
although this effect is still large, as measured by an author-designed assessment. There
9 In the study Purpura (2017), fidelity for each interventionist was: 97.4% (Range = 90.9% to 100%, for 26
of 78 total sessions), 89.1% (Range = 72.9% to 100%, for 22 of 65 total sessions), and 78.1% (Range =
56.3% to 100%, for 14 of 42 total sessions).
10 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.42; moderate impact; +5 months progress.
11 Effect size is Hedges' g = 1.58; very high impact; over 12 months progress.
12 Effect size is Hedges' g = 1.07; very high impact; over 12 months progress.
76
was no significant effect on receptive vocabulary when measured using a standardised
assessment, suggesting that while there are large effects for taught vocabulary there
may be limited generalisation of the learning. For full evidence appraisal of quality criteria
and calculated effect sizes for the Explicit Vocabulary Instruction intervention, please see
Table B. 6. Evidence appraisal for Explicit Vocabulary Instruction intervention in
Appendix B and Table C. 5. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Explicit
Vocabulary Instruction intervention in Appendix C, respectively.
Play and Language Intervention
Play and Language Intervention is a universal approach for 2-year-old children, delivered
in early years settings over 4 weeks. Evidence for the Play and Language Intervention is
from a USA-based study (Conner et al., 2014). Delivered by the researcher, this study is
a quasi-experimental trial measuring the effect of intervention on global language,
expressive and receptive vocabulary. As the study was conducted in the USA, further
research is required to ensure generalisability to the UK context.
Play and Language Intervention is designed to enhance play skills and language
development in 2-year-old children through storytelling, modelling, free play, and
prompting. It is based on evidence highlighting the importance of play and language
development at this early stage. The intervention is delivered in small groups of five
within the classroom, incorporating shared book reading alongside themed play activities.
Over four weeks, children engage with books and corresponding toy sets, with the first
two weeks focusing on a "bedtime" theme and the last two weeks on a "kitchen/grocery
store" theme. Each session involves reading a story, introducing a related toy set,
modelling play behaviours, and allowing both facilitated and independent playtime before
reviewing the session's themes. The intervention was delivered face-to-face by
researchers twice a week for a total of eight sessions. Materials include books and toys,
with no reported tailoring for individual children. Fidelity is maintained through a checklist
completed during each session to ensure adherence to the intervention procedures.
Evidence for Play and Language Intervention comes from a low-quality quasi-
experimental study with small sample size (Conner et al., 2014). Full evidence appraisal
of the quality criteria for Play and Language Intervention is in Table B. 7. Evidence
appraisal for Play and Language intervention in Appendix B. The study indicates that
children in the intervention group increased their auditory comprehension, expressive
language and overall (global) language from pre-post intervention, as measured by
standardised assessment. Additionally, increases in receptive and expressive vocabulary
were observed, based on author-designed assessment. However, the evidence paper
does not report whether these outcomes are statistically significant or provide
corresponding effect sizes, and there is insufficient data to calculate effect sizes.
77
Shared Book Reading with Gameplay
Shared Book Reading with Gameplay is a universal intervention designed to build
vocabulary knowledge in children aged 4-5 years by combining shared book reading
strategies with guided play to enhance motivation to learn. The intervention takes place
in classroom settings, delivered face-to-face in pairs over two 30-minute sessions within
one week. Children listen to one of two books using an enriched book reading method,
where ten target words per book (including verbs, nouns, prepositions, adverbs, and
adjectives) are explicitly taught.
Learning is reinforced through an author-modified Snakes & Ladders game, where
children answer vocabulary-related questions. As the game progresses, questions move
from primarily low demand (i.e., recalling story elements) to high demand (i.e., making
inferences and predictions based on the story). If children struggle with responses, they
receive scaffolded prompts linking words back to the story. Materials include books,
reading scripts, a vocabulary game board, and game pieces. The intervention is
delivered by researchers, with no reported tailoring for individual children (Hassinger-
Das., 2016). Fidelity is assessed through observations or recorded sessions using a
checklist, with reported fidelity ranging from 90.4% to 100%, and an overall average of
98% across experimenters¹³ ensuring the intervention is delivered as intended.
Evidence for Shared Book Reading with Gameplay comes from a low-to-moderate quality
USA-based RCT (Hassinger-Das et al., 2016) with a small sample size. The study found
the intervention has its highest effect on taught expressive vocabulary¹⁴ and lowest effect
on taught receptive vocabulary¹⁵ although this is also a very large effect, based on a non-
standardised assessment. There was no significant effect on broader expressive
language skills when measured using an author-designed assessment aligned with
specific coding categories (e.g., nouns, functions, gestures, synonyms, contexts). This
suggests large but very circumscribed benefits (only to taught vocabulary) and limited
generalisation of learning. Additionally, as the study was conducted in the USA, further
research is required to ensure generalisability to the UK context. For full evidence
appraisal of quality criteria and calculated effect sizes for the Shared Book Reading with
Gameplay intervention, please see Table B. 8. Evidence appraisal for Shared Book
Reading with Gameplay intervention in Appendix B and Table C. 6. Calculated effect
sizes using Hedges' g for Shared Book reading with Gameplay intervention in Appendix
C, respectively.
13 In the study by Hassinger-Das (2016), across experiments, average fidelity was 98%, with a range
between 96.5-100%.
14 Effect size is Hedges' g = 1.49; very high impact; over 12 months progress.
15 Effect size is Hedges' g = 1.30; very high impact; over 12 months progress.
78
Targeted support
Bridge Made of Stories
Bridge Made of Stories (Puente de Cuentos) is a dual-language (Spanish-English)
targeted (tier 2) intervention designed for children aged 4-5 with low language skills. It is
based on the principle that skills learned in one language can transfer to another,
supporting bilingual development. The intervention includes whole-class instruction in
English alongside small-group sessions in both Spanish and English to reinforce
language learning. Evidence for the programme comes from a USA-based RCT (Spencer
et al., 2020), which evaluated its impact on expressive and receptive vocabulary as well
as narrative language skills. However, further research is needed to assess its
effectiveness in a UK context.
The intervention is structured around scripted lessons that follow a consistent format
across three units (3 X 12 stories). Each story introduces two target vocabulary words
(e.g., rough/áspero). As the units progress, coordinating and subordinating conjunctions
are folded into the stories and lessons. During each lesson, the teacher or teaching
assistant reads the featured story and then guides the children through a series of
activities designed to help them learn the meaning of target words and to retell the
stories. Activities include both group responses and individual storytelling exercises,
ensuring active participation and reinforcement of narrative skills.
Children participate in a mix of whole-class lessons and targeted small-group sessions.
Each week, there are two whole-class lessons in English, two small-group lessons in
Spanish, and two small-group lessons in English. To facilitate cross-language transfer,
Spanish small-group lessons are conducted before English small-group lessons.
Additionally, parents of children receive Spanish-language family engagement activities,
which include structured questions and guidance on retelling the stories at home.
The programme provides 36 stories in English and 36 in Spanish, along with
accompanying vocabulary images. It is delivered in a classroom setting by teachers
through face-to-face instruction. A full implementation consists of 32-40 sessions per
block, with three blocks per year, each lasting 8-10 weeks. Fidelity involves observations
and checklists of adherence (12 items), responsiveness (3 items and quality (9 items). In
the evidence study (Spencer et al., 2020), researchers recorded the fidelity of 21% of
large-group lessons, 21% of Spanish small-group lessons, and 17% of English small-
group lessons.
A moderate-to-good quality RCT by Spencer et al., (2020) with a moderate sample size
suggests that Bridge Made of Stories has its highest effect on taught English receptive
79
vocabulary¹⁶, based on non-standardised assessment. The intervention has its lowest
effect on taught Spanish receptive vocabulary¹⁷ although this was still relatively high.
However, there were no significant effects on expressive vocabulary or word structure as
measured by standardised assessments, indicating limited generalisation of learning. For
full evidence appraisal of quality criteria and calculated effect sizes for the Bridge Made
of Stories intervention, please see Table B. 9. Evidence appraisal for Bridge Made of
Stories intervention in Appendix B and Table C. 7. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges'
g for Bridge Made of Stories intervention in Appendix C, respectively.
The study also reported an additional eight effect sizes across different intervention
blocks using various assessments (Spencer et al., 2020). Among these, one was
considered as 'very high' (English narrative), while seven were 'high' across multiple
areas, including English taught receptive vocabulary and grammar, and Spanish
narrative, taught receptive vocabulary, grammar, and narrative. For further details, see
the Supplementary Evidence Report.
Early Talk Boost
The Early Talk Boost is a targeted language programme designed for children aged 3-4
years with delayed language development. Developed by ICAN (now Speech and
Language UK) in collaboration with Pearson Assessment, it aims to improve children's
language and communication skills through structured group sessions delivered by
trained practitioners. Evidence for Early Talk Boost comes from a UK-based RCT
conducted by Reeves et al. (2018), which measured the intervention's effects on
expressive and receptive language.
Early Talk Boost was developed on principles similar to Talk Boost, a language
programme which has been shown to help children with delayed language in the early
years of school (Lee and Pring, 2016). It focuses on language development through
engaging children in activities they enjoy, and interactions with responsive adults who
model language. The intervention supports key language skills in a structured sequence,
including attention and listening, learning words, and building sentences.
The programme is designed for groups of six to eight children and follows a structured
approach to teaching language skills. It incorporates colour coding for sentence building,
storytelling to enhance language comprehension, and songs and rhymes to develop
phonics. Specially created storybooks featuring recurring characters reinforce learning
and are also provided to parents to support language development at home.
16 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.93; very high impact; +11 months progress.
17 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.46; high impact; +6 months progress.
80
Early Talk Boost includes various materials such as a manual, planning board, song
cards, toys, and a set of eight storybooks. The intervention is delivered by teachers in a
classroom setting through face-to-face sessions in small groups. Sessions last 20
minutes and occur three times a week over a nine-week period. While Early Talk Boost
provides structured content and materials, no specific adaptations (tailoring) or fidelity
measures have been reported to ensure it is delivered as intended.
Evidence for Early Talk Boost is from a low-to-moderate quality RCT with moderate
sample size (Reeves et al., 2018). The study indicates that the intervention has its
highest effect on receptive language¹⁸ and lowest effect on expressive language 19 based
on standardised assessment. However, even the highest effect is considered low impact
when measured using the Hedges' g effect size calculation. For full evidence appraisal of
quality criteria and calculated effect sizes for the Early Talk Boost intervention, please
see Table B. 10. Evidence appraisal for Early Talk Boost intervention in Appendix B and
Table C. 8. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Early Talk Boost intervention in
Appendix C, respectively.
Educator-Implemented Storybook Vocabulary Intervention
Educator-Implemented Storybook Vocabulary is a targeted intervention designed for
children at-risk of SLCN due to low socio-economic status (SES) backgrounds. The
intervention is based on evidence for explicit vocabulary instruction using storybooks and
multiple exposures to target vocabulary learning of children aged 4-5 years old. It uses
specifically developed storybooks designed to present selected words on multiple
occasions to children. The expectation is that children will learn a greater number of word
meanings using these storybooks than they would using commercially available books
where the exposure of target words may not be as frequent, and the degree of challenge
may not be aligned to children's needs. Evidence for the Educator-Implemented
Storybook Vocabulary Intervention, comes from a Canadian RCT study (Vuattoux et al,
2014), delivered by early years practitioners. The study measured the effect of the
intervention on expressive and receptive vocabulary. As the study was conducted in
Canada, further research is required to ensure generalisability to the UK context.
The intervention involves reading each storybook twice over consecutive sessions, with
half of the target words taught in the first session and the other half in the second. Before
reading, the educator introduces the 'magic words,' asking children to raise their hand
upon hearing them. During reading, the educator reinforces these definitions, prompts
children to pronounce the words, presents a simple definition of their meaning, and
18 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.06; low impact; +1 month progress.
19 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.04; very low impact; 0 months progress.
81
highlights relevant illustrations. Afterward, a recall activity and two verbally mediated
tasks encourage children to use and reflect on the meaning of the words.
The programme uses 30 specially developed storybooks and is delivered by teachers in
early years settings through face-to-face sessions in small groups. Sessions last 15
minutes and occur four times a week over five months. No reported adaptations were
made to tailor the intervention. Fidelity varied, with implementation ranging from 21.3% to
100% (Mean (M)=66.2%). While fidelity for storybook reading was, on average,
acceptable (M=75.9%), it was poorer for recall (M=65.1%), discrimination (M=60.9%),
and generalisation (M=54.9%). Children's participation and attention were also less than
optimal (M=50.0%).
Evidence for Educator-Implemented Storybook Vocabulary is from a good quality RCT
with small sample size (Vuattoux et al, 2014). The study indicates that the intervention
has a very high effect on composite receptive and expressive language²⁰, based on
author-designed assessment. Standardised formal assessments provide a more robust
test of effectiveness and test whether gains are generalised beyond taught items and
were not tested in this study. For full evidence appraisal of quality criteria and calculated
effect sizes for the Educator-Implemented Storybook Vocabulary intervention, please see
Table B. 11. Evidence appraisal for Educator-Implemented Storybook Vocabulary
intervention in Appendix B and Table C. 9. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for
Educator-Implemented Storybook Vocabulary intervention in Appendix C, respectively.
Happy Talk
Happy Talk is a targeted and manualised language intervention programme that aims to
support children between 0-6 years old, living in areas of social disadvantage. Over the
course of three terms, SLTs deliver training and coaching to parents, caregivers, and
early educators across a range of community settings (such as baby clinics, creches,
pre-schools and junior infant classes, which is the first year of primary school). The
intervention focuses on core interaction strategies whilst also aiming to create language-
rich early years environments. Included evidence for Happy Talk comes from one study
conducted in Ireland (Frizelle et al, 2021). The study is a quasi-experimental trial,
delivered by SLTs, measuring the effect of the intervention on global expressive and
receptive vocabulary.
Parents and caregivers receive training on strategies including modelling, expanding, and
commenting, along with information on listening, phonological awareness, and book
sharing. Preschool staff are trained in three core interaction skills as well as early literacy
and phonological awareness, along with resources for creating language-rich
20 Effect size is Hedges' g = 1.53; very high impact; more than 12 months progress.
82
environments and identifying children with speech, language, and communication needs
(SLCN). The programme is delivered face-to-face in early years settings, with parents
and caregivers receiving 12 one-hour sessions (both in group and individual formats),
while early years practitioners attend four sessions, including a 90-minute session and 30
minutes of coaching, with the remaining three sessions' duration unclear. The total
programme spans 7 months. Materials include a manual and a standard set of equipment
(unspecified in study). There is no reported tailoring of the intervention, and fidelity is
assessed through video recordings of sessions, which are independently rated for
adherence to specific activities and how sessions are delivered.
The study by Frizelle et al. (2021), a good quality quasi-experimental study with a small-
to-moderate sample size, indicated that the Happy Talk intervention has high to
moderate effects using an omnibus language standardised test. Its highest effect is on
auditory comprehension (receptive language)²¹ and the lowest effect on composite
expressive and receptive language²², based on standardised assessment. There was no
significant effect of the Happy Talk intervention on expressive language, as measured by
standardised assessment. For full evidence appraisal of quality criteria and calculated
effect sizes for Happy Talk intervention, please see Table B. 12. Evidence appraisal for
Happy Talk intervention in Appendix B and Table C. 10. Calculated effect sizes using
Hedges' g for Happy Talk intervention in Appendix C, respectively.
Literate Language Intervention
The Literate Language Intervention (LLI) is a structured, targeted programme designed to
enhance language and literacy skills in high-need children aged 3-5 years old who are at
risk of academic difficulties due to socio-economic or developmental factors. The
intervention is designed to be a pull-out programme during the school day at times
chosen by the teacher. Evidence for the intervention comes from a RCT in the USA,
where it was delivered by early years practitioners and measured its effect on expressive
grammar, expressive language, receptive vocabulary, and listening comprehension
(Phillips et al., 2016). However, as the study was conducted in the USA, further research
is needed to determine its applicability and generalisability to the UK context.
The approach is a preventative programme aimed at supporting children who may not
meet the criteria for individually designed services from an SLT. It targets language skills
related to semantics and syntax, including prepositions and prepositional phrases,
conjunctions, adverbs, adverbial phrases, and negations. The intervention focuses on
both sentence-level and narrative-level understanding of literate language concepts.
Designed to be delivered in four 3-week units, four days per week, the programme uses
21 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.45; high impact; +5 months progress.
22 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.44; moderate impact; +5 months progress.
83
instructional materials designed for use by early years practitioners without specialised
linguistic or clinical expertise.
The intervention involves primary instructional strategies such as repeated modelling,
visual supports, and direct instruction of targeted constructions and words. These
strategies are embedded within four main activities, and scripted lesson plans guide
practitioners in differentiating instruction for individual children. When children struggle
with responses, practitioners provide immediate corrective feedback and downward
scaffolding. For children who respond correctly, upward extensions are offered, such as
asking for complete sentences. Exemplar scaffolding suggestions, including both
simplifying (e.g., elicited imitation and forced-choice selection) and challenging
scaffolding (e.g., asking children to restate responses in complete sentence or give
instructions), are provided in the lesson plans and training.
Materials include scripted lesson plans, with each unit containing the four main elements:
an interactive adventure story, instruction on two story-embedded mental-state verb
words, activities with manipulative props, and a picture game for review. The intervention
is delivered by early years practitioners in early years settings, face-to-face in group
settings, with 48 sessions of 20 minutes each, delivered four times a week over 12 weeks
(totalling 16 hours). No tailoring is reported for this intervention. Fidelity is supported
through live observations of practitioners at least once per unit, followed by feedback
sessions, along with ongoing professional development. However, in the evidence study,
fidelity observations were lost due to technological issues and are not reported (Phillips
et al., 2016).
Evidence from Phillips et al. (2016), a low-to-moderate quality RCT, with moderate
sample size, indicates that the LLI has its highest effect on composite language score
(receptive and expressive)²³ based on author-designed assessment. Its lowest effect
reaching a moderate level of effect was on listening comprehension²⁴, based on
standardised assessment, although this was a moderate effect and suggests
generalisation of benefits to broader receptive language skills. There was no significant
effect of the intervention on expressive grammar or expressive vocabulary as measured
by standardised assessment. For full evidence appraisal of quality criteria and calculated
effect sizes for LLI, please see Table B. 13. Evidence appraisal for Literate Language
intervention in Appendix B and Table C. 11. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for
Literate Language intervention in Appendix C, respectively.
Nuffield Early Language Intervention (NELI)
23 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.88; very high impact; +11 months progress.
24 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.31; moderate impact; +4 months progress.
84
The Nuffield Early Language Intervention (NELI) programme is a targeted approach,
designed to support schools to identify and support early language difficulties in children
aged 4-5 years old. It aims to improve children's vocabulary, develop narrative skills,
encourage active listening, and build confidence in independent speaking. This
programme consists of fifty-seven 30-minute small group sessions and thirty-seven 15-
minute individual sessions over a 20-week period. The intervention is delivered face-to-
face, both in groups and individually, with no specific tailoring reported for individual
children. Evidence for the NELI programme comes from three UK-based studies, all
delivered by early years practitioners (West et al, 2021; Fricke et al 2017; Fricke et al
2013). The studies are three RCTs measuring the effect of NELI on oral language,
expressive and receptive vocabulary, grammar, and listening comprehension.
NELI offers an integrated programme incorporating the Language Screen digital
assessment to support identification of difficulties and Continuing Professional
Development (CPD) training delivered by SLTs and specialist teachers, with mentor
support alongside. The NELI website also details a NELI Whole-Class approach;
however, published peer-reviewed evidence for this was not available at the time of this
report.
Children are taught vocabulary across multiple and repetitive contexts. Narrative skills
are targeted by giving children the opportunity to practice taught vocabulary in connected
speech, introducing them to key story elements and to the sequencing of events. Within
this, practitioners support children's expressive language and grammar. Phonological
awareness and letter-sound knowledge activities incorporate taught vocabulary to further
consolidate these words. Listening work targets children's active listening skills and
incorporates auditory discrimination, memory, and sequencing as well as rhyming
activities. Fidelity is monitored by having teaching assistants record the number of group
and individual sessions delivered to each child. Additionally, the components of each
session may be independently observed and graded on a 5-point scale, with the scale
evaluating adherence to the manual instructions (1 = several aspects missing/not
satisfactory, 5 = according to manual with very good use of resources, questions, and
techniques).
Evidence for NELI is from three good quality RCTs with large sample sizes (West et al,
2021; Fricke et al 2017; Fricke et al 2013). Results indicate that the intervention has
moderate to very high effects on most outcomes. As outcomes are replicated across a
number of good quality studies, we can have very high confidence in these findings. The
intervention has its highest effect on taught expressive vocabulary²⁵ when delivered over
30-weeks, based on author-designed assessment (Fricke, 2017); and lowest effect on
25 Effect size is Hedges' g = 1.12; very high impact; more than 12 months progress.
85
grammar²⁶ based on standardised assessments (Fricke, 2017; West, 2024). For full
evidence appraisal of quality criteria and calculated effect sizes for NELI, please see
Table B. 14. Evidence appraisal for Nuffield Early Language intervention in Appendix B
and Table C. 12. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Nuffield Early Language
intervention in Appendix C, respectively.
Across all three RCTs, the studies report a further forty-one effect sizes, as multiple
outcomes were measured using different assessments. Of these, three are 'very high'
(taught expressive vocabulary (x 3 effect sizes), three are 'high' (expressive vocabulary,
grammar (x 3 effect sizes) and listening comprehension), twenty-three are 'moderate'
(expressive vocabulary (x 7 effect sizes), receptive vocabulary (x 6 effect sizes),
grammar (x 3 effect sizes), narrative (x 5 effect sizes), listening comprehension (x 2
effect sizes), and eleven are 'low' (grammar (x 10 effect sizes), narrative). For further
details, see the Supplementary Evidence Report.
Preparing Pequeños
Preparing Pequeños is an integrated, small-group, and targeted cognitive instruction
programme designed for Dual Language Learners aged 4-5 years who are the farthest
behind in their language and literacy development when entering Reception class. Small-
group instruction is expected to promote gains based on progress monitoring, individual
responsive support, practice, and feedback specific to child needs.
The intervention targets children's oral language, phonological awareness, print
knowledge, and maths development, and consists of 90 minutes sessions four times a
week for one year. Evidence is based on a sample of Spanish-English bilingual children.
The included evidence for Preparing Pequeños comes from a USA-based study, in which
the intervention is delivered by early years practitioners (Landry et al, 2019). The study is
a randomised controlled trial measuring the effect of intervention on expressive
vocabulary, grammar, and phonological awareness in English and Spanish. As the study
was conducted in the USA, further research is required to ensure generalisability to the
UK context.
The intervention involves instruction that is based primarily on the use of theme-based
vocabulary cards and dialogic reading approaches. Teachers use dialogic reading
techniques during a 15-minute shared reading activity. Phonological awareness small-
group instruction occurs through activities designed to develop sensitivity to rhyme,
awareness of words and syllables, and sensitivity to phonemes in the initial position. The
first activities are designed to develop awareness of rhyme units, followed by awareness
of sound units using compound words, followed by syllabication using bi and multi-
26 Effect sizes are Hedges' g =0.08 (both); low impact; +1 months progress.
86
syllabic words, and finishing with identification of initial sound units. Print knowledge
instruction targets name recognition and knowledge of letter names and letter sounds, as
well as emergent writing. Initial activities are designed to help the child learn to recognise
their name in print, whereas later activities are intended to teach letters.
Activities are non-tailored, and are designed around the use of alphabet books, magnetic
letters, letter picture cards, small objects with a common initial letter, and other
appropriate manipulatives. Small group instruction operates on a rotation basis using two
tables for group work and independent 'learning centres' for cognitive activities are set up
across the classroom for when children are not taking part in the group work. Classroom
teachers are responsible for vocabulary and dialogic small group reading instruction and
maths instruction. Paraprofessionals (individuals who support certificated professionals in
education settings) are responsible for small-group phonological awareness, phonics,
print knowledge, writing, and maths instruction. Literacy or language rotations occur
every 15 minutes for 60 minutes, so every group meets with both the teacher (for 15
minutes) and the paraprofessional (for 15 minutes) and completes independent centre
activities each day (for 30 minutes).
Fidelity observations of the 90-minute group sessions are conducted to evaluate the
quality of both the small-group instructional approach and the classroom management
strategies implemented during the lesson. In Year 1, each teacher is observed
approximately three times. In Years 2 and 3, coaches conduct fidelity observations seven
times per year. Observations are rated on a scale from 1 (low quality) to 6 (high quality).
Evidence for the Preparing Pequeños intervention is from one moderate quality RCT with
large sample size (Landry et al, 2019). The study findings indicate that the intervention
has its highest effect on phonological awareness²⁷, a moderate effect, and lowest effect
on grammar²⁸ based on standardised assessments in children's home language
(Spanish). There was no effect of the intervention on print awareness in Spanish and
basic concepts in English as measured by standardised assessment. For full evidence
appraisal of quality criteria and calculated effect sizes for Preparing Pequeños, please
see Table B. 15. Evidence appraisal for Preparing Pequeños intervention in Appendix B
and Table C. 13. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Preparing Pequeños
intervention in Appendix C, respectively.
Read Aloud
Read Aloud is a targeted vocabulary intervention designed for children aged 3 to 5 years
old who are at risk of poor language development. The intervention focuses on shared
27 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.30; moderate impact; +4 months progress.
28 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.10; low impact; +2 months progress.
87
storybook reading experiences supported by vocabulary extension activities to enhance
children's receptive vocabulary. Evidence for the effectiveness of Read Aloud comes
from a single study conducted in the USA (Silverman et al., 2013), in which early years
practitioners implemented the intervention. This study, a RCT, measured the impact of
the intervention on children's receptive vocabulary. While the findings are promising,
further research is needed to determine the generalisability of the results to the UK
context.
The Read Aloud intervention is based on evidence supporting the effectiveness of
reading storybooks aloud as a context for vocabulary learning. It also draws on research
highlighting the importance of high-quality, frequent interactions between children,
parents, caregivers, or teachers, for supporting vocabulary development. The goal of the
intervention is to improve children's vocabulary through structured 'read alouds' or 'read
alouds plus' extension activities.
Read Aloud and Read Aloud Plus both follow the same structured reading protocol,
which includes 24 books and 48 target words. Each book is read twice a week over a 12-
week period, with sessions lasting approximately 30 minutes. The intervention is
organised into three thematic units: food, animals, and transportation. Each theme
contains four narrative books and four informational books. Weekly instruction focuses on
four target words, two from each of two books.
On day 1 of a book reading, teachers are instructed to introduce the theme, the book's
title and author, and preview one or two target vocabulary words during the prereading
phase. During the reading, teachers pause approximately five to six times to ask
questions and highlight vocabulary. After reading, they define the target words, review
them in the context of the story, offer additional examples, and encourage children to act
out the words when appropriate. On day 2, teachers review word definitions during
prereading and prompt children to say the words. They again pause five to six times
during reading to reinforce vocabulary in context, followed by a final review of the words
after reading.
The Read Aloud Plus condition includes additional vocabulary reinforcement activities
beyond the reading sessions. On Day 2, teachers are asked to create three further
opportunities for children to engage with the target words: during morning meeting or
circle time; in small-group settings where children draw or write about one of the words;
and in voluntary play activities designed to reinforce understanding of another word.
The intervention is delivered by classroom teachers in a group setting, face-to-face.
Materials include 24 books and accompanying lesson plans. Over the 12-week period,
the programme consists of 48 sessions, each lasting 30 minutes, totalling 24 hours of
instruction. No individual tailoring was reported in the study.
88
Fidelity of implementation is assessed through structured observations, conducted on
two occasions during Read Aloud, morning meeting, small-group, and centre time.
Observers record whether key elements of the protocol are present (scored as 1) or
absent (scored as 0). Fidelity is evaluated before reading (e.g., defining target words),
during reading (e.g., discussing target words), and after reading (e.g., reinforcing
vocabulary). In the Silverman et al. (2013) study, overall fidelity was 0.76 for the Read
Aloud condition and 0.98 for the Read Aloud Plus condition, suggesting a high level of
adherence to the protocol.
Evidence from one low-to-moderate quality RCT with a large sample size indicates that
Read Aloud brings moderate to high effects (Silverman et al., 2013). It has its highest
effect on receptive vocabulary²⁹ when Read Aloud plus is delivered (including extension
activities) and lowest effect on receptive vocabulary³⁰, although this is still a moderate
effect, when Read Aloud is only delivered, based on author-designed assessments.
There was no effect of intervention on receptive vocabulary measured by standardised
assessment. This suggests that benefits may not generalise significantly to language
knowledge which is not taught in the intervention. For full evidence appraisal of quality
criteria and calculated effect sizes for Read Aloud, please see Table B. 16. Evidence
appraisal for Read Aloud intervention in Appendix B and Table C. 14. Calculated effect
sizes using Hedges' g for Read Aloud intervention in Appendix C, respectively.
Story Friends
Story Friends is a targeted vocabulary intervention designed for implementation in early
childhood classrooms with children aged 4 to 6 years who demonstrate low language
ability. It is delivered by teachers in small group settings over a 13-week period. The
programme includes daily classroom-based strategies as well as structured home-based
activities. These are designed to extend learning beyond the classroom, with support
provided to parents and caregivers to reinforce vocabulary development at home.
Evidence supporting the Story Friends programme comes from two studies conducted in
the USA (Kelley et al., 2015; Kelley et al., 2020). These include a RCT and a quasi-
experimental study, both of which examined the programme's impact on receptive
vocabulary. As the studies were conducted in the USA, further research is necessary to
assess the programme's generalisability and effectiveness in UK contexts.
Story Friends emphasises repeated exposure, structured review, and practice
opportunities both in educational settings and at home. A key strength of the programme
is its focus on feasibility, making it suitable for integration into early years education
environments. The programme comprises three main components: automated listening
29 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.68; high impact; +8 months progress.
30 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.44; moderate impact; +5 months progress.
89
centres, classroom-based strategies, and home strategies. Listening centres involve pre-
recorded storybooks embedded with scripted vocabulary lessons. Each book targets four
challenging vocabulary words and includes explicit teaching, simple definitions,
supportive story contexts, child-friendly examples, and multiple response opportunities.
The intervention includes 12 instructional books and three review books.
Classroom strategies support teachers in embedding vocabulary instruction into
everyday classroom routines. Home strategies are designed to engage families in
vocabulary development by encouraging discussion and use of the target words at home.
Parents and caregivers can access a 'virtual classroom' through an app, which provides
daily reminders and vocabulary activities. The app also enables teachers to share video
clips that extend vocabulary instruction and demonstrate techniques for families to use.
Materials required for the programme are tailored to each component. Listening centre
materials include pre-recorded storybooks, headphones, a splinter (for turning pages),
and a teacher's manual. Classroom resources include teacher prompt cards, a weekly
word chart, and a review board. Home materials include a family training video, stickers,
necklaces, family diary forms, and access to the communication app.
The programme combines face-to-face instruction through listening centres in group
formats and one-on-one support through classroom and home-based strategies.
Listening centre sessions occur three times per week and last approximately 9 to 11
minutes, supplemented by daily classroom activities. The full programme runs over a 13-
week period. No tailoring of the programme was reported in the included studies.
However, fidelity of implementation is supported by using daily checklists completed by
teachers and independent observations of listening centre sessions.
Findings from one good quality RCT by Kelley et al. (2015), with a moderate sample size,
indicates that the intervention has a very high effect on taught receptive vocabulary³¹
based on author-designed assessment. There was no effect of intervention on language
comprehension measured by standardised assessment. Effect sizes from the Kelley et
al. (2020) quasi-experimental study report no effect sizes, nor were they able to be
calculated. Additionally, no effect of the Story Friends intervention was reported on
receptive vocabulary, as measured by standardised assessment, suggesting limited
generalisation of learning. For full evidence appraisal of quality criteria and calculated
effect sizes for Story Friends, please see Table B. 17. Evidence appraisal for Story
Friends intervention in Appendix B and Table C. 15. Calculated effect sizes using
Hedges' g for Story Friends intervention in Appendix C, respectively.
31 Effect size is Hedges' g = 2.62; very high impact; more than 12 months progress.
90
Talk Boost
Talk Boost is an intervention programme created to support children aged 3 to 7 years
who have delayed language development. It was developed by the Communication Trust
and ICAN³², with support from Every Child a Chance Trust. The programme is intended
to be implemented by early years practitioners, in early years settings, following training
from an SLT. The intervention takes place over a 10-week period and involves both
small-group and whole-class sessions. Talk Boost was designed to cover all areas of
language appropriate to children aged between 3 and 7 years old with language
difficulties, and it is intended to include children with English as an Additional Language
(EAL).
Talk Boost was developed based on existing research demonstrating that children from
low socio-economic status (SES) areas and backgrounds are more likely to experience
delayed language development which persists through education (Locke et al 2002; Law
et al 2011). It aims to develop an intervention that could be delivered with minimal
support from specialists, thus enabling impact on a wider number of children.
Talk Boost consists of five strands, four of which are implemented in small-group settings
and one through whole-class instruction. The intervention targets both receptive and
expressive language, focusing on developing vocabulary, sentence construction, and
narrative skills. In addition to language development, it also addresses listening,
attention, and social interaction. The whole-class activities are designed to embed these
language principles into everyday classroom teaching, encouraging consistent use by
educators. Additionally, activities for parents and caregivers are also provided to
encourage engagement and understanding of how to support language at home.
Sessions are conducted face-to-face by teachers or teaching assistants, with group
sessions occurring three times a week for 30 minutes each, over a 10-week period.
However, the frequency of whole-class activities was not clearly reported.
Materials used in the intervention include picture resources and games. There is no
reported tailoring, the approach is designed to be widely applicable. Information on
fidelity, how closely the programme is delivered as intended, has not been reported.
Evidence for the effectiveness of Talk Boost includes a good quality RCT with a large
sample size conducted by Lee et al. (2016) in the UK, where early years practitioners
delivered the intervention. The study measured the effect of the Talk Boost intervention
on expressive grammar and narrative language. Findings from this RCT, indicates that
Talk Boost can bring about large effects. Its highest effect was on the narrative language
32 ICAN stands for "I CAN", a UK-based children's communication charity that support children with SLCN.
91
skills of children with EAL in Year 1³³, and its lowest effect was on the expressive
grammar skills of children with EAL in Reception class³⁴, based on standardised
assessment.
For monolingual English-speaking children, the Talk Boost intervention's highest effect
was on narrative language skills of Reception class children³⁵ and its lowest effect was
on narrative language skills of Year 1 children³⁶ (and the grammar skills of Reception
class and Year 1 children³⁷ For full evidence appraisal of quality criteria and calculated
effect sizes for Talk Boost, please see Table B. 18. Evidence appraisal for Talk Boost
intervention in Appendix B and Table C. 16. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for
Talk Boost intervention in Appendix C, respectively. The study by Lee et al. (2016)
reports a further thirteen effect sizes as multiple outcomes were measured using different
assessments. Of these, one is 'high' (grammar), eight are 'moderate' (grammar (x 6
effect sizes), narrative (x 2 effect sizes)), and four are 'low' (grammar (x 3 effect sizes),
narrative). For further details, see the Supplementary Evidence Report.
Evidence summary of universal and targeted interventions for language
There is good quality evidence supporting the effectiveness of several language
interventions identified in this review, including: NELI, NELI Preschool, Developing
Talkers, Educator-Implemented Storybook Vocabulary Intervention, and Talk Boost, all of
which are effective with moderate to high effects. Among these, evidence for NELI stands
out as the most robust due to the large sample size, repeated validation, and study
design. Happy Talk also shows moderate effects and is of good quality, but since it has
not been tested in an RCT, and has a relatively small sample size, its findings should be
interpreted with caution.
Preparing Pequeños is another intervention with moderate quality evidence and
moderate effects. It is particularly notable as one of the few interventions designed
specifically for bilingual children. However, it was developed in a USA Spanish-English
context, which limits its direct applicability to the UK's bilingual population.
A number of vocabulary-focused interventions have shown moderate to high effect sizes
based on good quality evidence. Namely, Dialogic Reading for Mathematical Language,
Bridge Made of Stories, Story Friends, and Read Aloud. However, these effects are
primarily seen in researcher-created measures rather than standardised tests,
33 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.79; very high impact; +12 months progress.
34 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.02; very low impact; +0 months progress.
35 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.58; high impact; +7 months progress.
36 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.04; very low impact; +0 months progress.
37 Effect size is Hedges' g = 0.04; very low impact; +0 months progress.
92
suggesting the learning is not generalised to wider language gains than the vocabulary
taught in the intervention.
Some other interventions, such as Explicit Vocabulary Instruction, Play and Language
Intervention, Shared Book Reading with Gameplay, Early Talk Boost, and Literate
Language Intervention, have only been evaluated in lower quality studies. As a result,
confidence in their effectiveness currently remains low, and further research is required
to test them more robustly.
In terms of availability, not all interventions are readily accessible to practitioners for use.
The transition from research to practice is often hindered by a lack of availability of
interventions with proven efficacy in a form which enables practitioners to utilise them.
Additionally, some interventions have been developed outside the UK and may require
adaptation to suit UK educational and linguistic contexts. Table 12 summarises where
universal and targeted interventions for language were developed, along with their
availability.
Table 12. Country where the universal and targeted language interventions were
developed and their availability for use in practice
Intervention
Country where
Availability
intervention was
developed
Bridge Made of Stories
USA
Not yet available, publication of
programme is planned as
component of Story Champs
Curriculum
Developing Talkers
USA
Unable to determine availability
Dialogic Reading for
USA
Stimulus books available for
Mathematical Language
purchase.
Early Talk Boost
UK
Available for purchase
Educator-Implemented
Canada
Unable to determine availability
Storybook Vocabulary
Intervention
Explicit Vocabulary
Netherlands
Unable to determine availability
Instruction
Happy Talk
Ireland
Training and roll-out programme
currently in development and being
evaluated in an RCT
93
Intervention
Country where
Availability
intervention was
developed
Literate Language
USA
Not available, research protocol only
Intervention
Nuffield Early Language
UK
Available for purchase
Intervention (NELI)
NELI Preschool
UK
Available for purchase
Play and Language
USA
Unable to determine availability
Intervention
Preparing Pequeños
USA
The English-only version (Literacy
Express) is available for purchase
via the authors
Read Aloud
USA
Unable to determine availability
Shared Book Reading with
USA
Not available, research protocol only
Gameplay
Story Friends
USA
Available for purchase
Talk Boost
UK
Available for purchase
Support for bilingual children's language
Bilingual children acquire skills in more than one language at varying degrees of
proficiency throughout their early years. For many, proficiency in primary and secondary
(or multiple) languages will differ as they experience different patterns of language
exposure via interactions with their home and wider environment, including early years
settings. Proficiency may vary between understanding and use of language, or between
oral and written language skills; however, this does not mean that bilingual children are
any more likely to develop speech and language needs compared to monolingual peers
(RCSLT, 2006). A child should be regarded as bilingual regardless of the relative
proficiency of languages they understand or use (Stow and Pert, 2015).
Interventions for children who are bilingual should include support in their home
language. This protects the cultural, cognitive, and academic advantage of bilingualism,
and ensures the child remains connected with their heritage language community,
including grandparents and wider family (Pert and Bradley, 2018). Gains in home
language will make learning English as an additional language easier for the child (Nair
et al., 2023). This home language support could be achieved through partnership with
parents and caregivers, home-language-speaking practitioners, and the involvement of
interpreters (Pert, 2023).
94
Seven of the universal and targeted language interventions identified in this review
explicitly include bilingual children in their evaluation sample suggesting they could be
beneficial to bilingual children. Namely, Bridge Made of Stories, Developing Talkers,
NELI, NELI Preschool, Preparing Pequeños, Read Aloud, and Talk Boost. However, few
of these interventions provide home language support (only reported in Bridge Made of
Stories and Preparing Pequeños). Rather, the majority focus only on English (i.e. NELI,
NELI Preschool, Talk Boost) and measure only English outcomes.
The interventions identified for supporting bilingual children incorporate many of the
same strategies used in universal and targeted language support for monolingual
English-speaking children. These include explicit instruction, use of questions and
prompts, repetition, and visual aids such as picture cards. They also provide
opportunities for retelling, oral language practice, and shared or dialogic book reading.
Such strategies create rich, interactive learning environments and are all tools that early
years practitioners can embed into everyday practice to support language development
in bilingual children.
What distinguishes these interventions is their emphasis on providing bilingual children
with multiple and varied language learning opportunities. This includes combining
different instructional techniques and engaging stimuli to enhance language acquisition in
both English and the child's home language. However, to maximise their effectiveness
and cultural relevance, it is considered best practice to supplement these interventions
with opportunities for children to experience language learning in their home language.
This can be achieved through active involvement of parents or caregivers, the inclusion
of bilingual early years practitioners, or the use of interpreters. A dual language
approach, where both English and the home language are used, has been shown to be
possible and beneficial. This is exemplified by interventions like Preparing Pequeños and
Bridge Made of Stories, which are delivered in both Spanish and English in the US.
However, this particular cultural context is not mirrored in the UK where it would be much
more challenging in early years settings with a wide variety of home languages.
Early years settings should provide a rich universal language learning environment,
including the provision of home language and dual language books where culturally
appropriate and maximising home language exposure opportunities wherever possible
throughout the day and in partnership with parents and caregivers. As part of this,
practitioners should be aware that many bilingual children may use codeswitching.
Codeswitching refers to the practice of switching between languages within a sentence to
convey meaning (Myers-Scotton, 2006).
A child may not know (and should not be expected to know) all words in both languages
at any given time. During interventions and throughout all interactions, early years
practitioners should be careful not to interpret codeswitching as mistakes or difficulties or
95
respond by correcting the child. This may overlook the child's intended expression of
meaning, and can make them feel unheard, affecting their self-esteem and confidence
and their language development (Stow and Pert, 2015).
Learning from specialist language interventions
Nine specialist interventions for language were also identified (Dawes et al., 2019, Fey et
al., 2017, Karaaslan et al., 2013, Restrepo et al., 2013, Roden et al., 2019, Smith-Lock et
al., 2015, Trebacz et al., 2023, Washington and Warr-Leeper, 2013, Wilcox et al., 2020).
These specialist interventions are designed to be delivered or overseen by an SLT and
are aimed at supporting children with specific identified language needs. Therefore, it is
not recommended for them to be delivered independently by other professionals. As
stated for speech and stammering, any such learning must be interpreted with caution.
The research team considered the practices embedded within specialist interventions
which, in their judgement, may be possible and safe for early years practitioners to apply.
Thus, seven approaches and strategies from specialist interventions to support children
with their language are discussed. Table 13 provides an overview of these approaches
and the age range where they have been used effectively as a specialist intervention.
Importantly, these judgements require empirical evaluation and should be considered
only alongside guidance from an SLT.
Table 13. Specialist language approaches or techniques, along with their
applicable age range within the pre-school period and level of support for potential
non-specialist delivery
Specialist approach or technique
Age range (years)
Level of support
Shared/dialogic book reading
4-5
Universal; Targeted
Explicit instruction
3-5
Universal; Targeted
Responsive interaction
0-5
Universal; Targeted
Modelling
0-5
Universal; Targeted
Use of questions and prompts
1-5
Universal; Targeted
Vocabulary repetition, expansion,
3-5
Universal; Targeted
and recasting
Structured language learning
0-5
Universal; Targeted
opportunities
Across this evidence, there are components of specialist interventions that also appear
within universal interventions for language. These components may be considered useful
strategies for supporting children's language and communication at a universal or
96
targeted level. However, rather than being considered as a menu of options, it is more
helpful to view them as key components of language-enriching early years environments.
Justice (2004) provides guidance tailored specifically to early years practitioners to
support the provision of language-enriching environments in early years settings. It
suggests that high-quality language input includes: (1) diverse and varied language
content, vocabulary, sentence structures, and functions; (2) frequent, consistent, and
responsive interactions with adults; and (3) repeated exposure to key vocabulary and
language structures.
The second of these principles (frequent, consistent, and responsive interactions with
adults) highlights certain qualities of adult-child interaction that support language
learning. Children learn language through interaction with others. The nature or quality of
that interaction matters. The more frequently and consistently children engage in
interactions with others with those particular qualities, the more robust their language
development will be (Rowe and Snow, 2020). This type of interaction is often termed
Responsive-contingent interaction. A responsive adult is not directive of a child's
attention but follows the child's lead, watching and listening carefully for communication
and responding promptly to the child's communicative attempts with language relating to
the child's focus of attention. They are also responsive to the child's developmental level
so the language they use within the child's Zone of Proximal Development - the gap
between what a child can do on their own and what they can potentially do with support
and assistance - meaning being one step ahead of the child's development. For
example, if a child is using single words (e.g. cup), the adult will use two words together
to model to the child (e.g. Luna's cup or red cup).
Rowe and Snow (2020) present a valuable framework describing the dimensions of
adult-child interaction which have been shown to be important to language development
and how the qualities of each dimension need to change over development to support
optimal progress for children.
Dimension 1: Interactive - features such as responsiveness, joint attention,
focusing on the child's interests and encouraging active involvement.
Dimension 2: Linguistic - features relating to the vocabulary and grammar used by
the adult and moving from the repetition of key words, through to longer
sentences, and increasing grammatical and discourse complexity.
Dimension 3: Conceptual - relates to the content and meaning of the
conversations moving from present and familiar objects and events to more
abstract topics (past, present, hypothetical) for older children.
Within the specialist interventions reviewed by the research team, there are a number of
key components of language-enriching early years environments. These include:
97
Responsive-contingent interaction (Fey et al., 2017); (Karaaslan et al., 2013)
Shared and dialogic book reading (Dawes et al., 2019); (Restrepo et al., 2013)
Explicit instruction (Wilcox et al., 2020)
Modelling (Dawes et al., 2019); (Smith-Lock et al., 2015); (Trebacz et al., 2023)
(Wilcox et al., 2020)
Open and inferential questions and prompts (Dawes et al., 2019); (Fey et al.,
2013) (Fey, 1986); (Smith-Lock et al., 2015)
Repetition, recasts, and expansions (Fey et al., 2013); (Restrepo et al., 2013);
(Smith-Lock et al., 2015); (Trebacz et al., 2023); (Wilcox et al., 2020)
Structured language learning opportunities (Trebacz et al., 2023); (Wilcox et al.,
2020)
The details of these approaches are described in the Supplementary Evidence Report.
These approaches are not mutually exclusive in content, and many include overlapping
techniques (e.g. modelling and recasting; dialogic book reading; and open and inferential
questions and prompts).
For these language enriching environments to be enacted in early years settings, early
years practitioners must be intentional and deliberate about the language they choose
and the contexts within which they use it. To support this, planning should articulate
which content, form and use might be used by the early years practitioner in an activity
and prompts for early educators provided (e.g. a summary card in a game box, a small
poster on the wall of the home corner) to keep high-quality language 'front of mind'.
(Justice, 2004).
Audit tools can support early years settings to monitor the degree to which they are
providing language-enriching early years environments and identify goals for quality
improvement (Law et al, 2019). For example, the Communication Supporting Classrooms
Observation Tool (CSCOT) (Dockrell et al, 2012) is a valid and reliable tool that settings
can use to audit their provision.
Ensuring all practitioners and settings are equipped to provide such environments is a
fundamental priority for universal, Quality First teaching. It is essential to note that
changing early years practitioner practice, particularly with respect to the qualities of
interactions, is not simple and requires models of professional development, including
coaching, peer support, and ongoing collaborative practice (see Work Package 3:
Working together). Programmes do exist to promote behaviour change through these
types of support but did not fall within the parameters of this review. Notable programmes
with varying stages evidence available and ongoing evaluation include Learning
98
Language and Loving it (Girolametto et al, 2003); Talking Time (Dockrell et al, 2023) and
Coaching Early Conversations, Interaction and Language (CECIL) (Barbour, 2022).
Conclusions
Although efforts were made to identify all relevant interventions, within a rapid review
framework some may be missed. Furthermore, some relevant interventions may have
publications which fall just outside of the relevant time frame chosen for inclusion. While
we cannot guarantee complete comprehensiveness, this review is thought to consider
the large majority of available interventions and their relevant evidence appraised. We
are aware of a number of ongoing evaluations by the Education Endowment Fund (EEF)
and encourage ongoing engagement with their publications as new evidence emerges.
The following conclusions represent the practical implications of the evidence described
and synthesised in Work Package 2: Intervention and support. This review aims to
provide early years practitioners with guidance regarding evidence-based universal and
targeted approaches to supporting children with stammering, speech, and language
needs across the 0-5 years age range. It is recommended that practitioners use
approaches with robust supporting evidence wherever possible to ensure optimal
outcomes for children. However, it is clear that a number of gaps remain in the available
evidence and so, recommendations for future research also follow.
Prioritising universal support
Ensuring effective, 'Quality First' universal support should be a priority in early
years settings, as it supports all children to reach their potential in speech and
language development. Strong universal provision can also help prevent poor
outcomes for children with specific needs, such as those who stammer.
In addition to supporting general development, high-quality universal provision acts as a
safety net. It benefits children who may have unidentified language needs by offering a
language-rich environment. Moreover, it can serve as an early indicator of need,
signalling when a child fails to make expected progress despite when provided with an
enriching environment. Key components of high-quality universal provision include:
Enriching physical and social environments, offering varied learning opportunities
and high-quality adult-child interactions.
Intentional and deliberate planning and implementation of strategies to enable
high-quality input including, engaging frequently and consistently in responsive
interactions with adults; hearing high-quality language models with recurrence and
repetitions of key vocabulary and structures; and hearing diverse and varied input
with respect to its content and vocabulary, form, and sentence structures, and use
or functional purpose.
99
Evidence-based approaches that enhance language development in a Universal
setting include:
Shared or dialogic book reading
Structured language learning opportunities
Explicit instruction, covering vocabulary, phonological awareness, and
narrative structure
Language-supporting prompts and questions
Regular audits of universal provision can help maintain and improve the quality of
support. Tools like the Communication Supporting Classrooms Observation Tool
(CSCOT) is freely available and useful for evaluating speech and language-
enriching characteristics. These audits can also form the basis for action plans
when improvements are needed.
To further embed high-quality language input, early years practitioners should
include explicit goals related to language content, form, and use in their planning.
Visual aids and prompts (e.g., summary cards in games or posters in role-play
areas) can help keep effective language strategies 'front of mind' during
implementation.
Having the processes, knowledge, skills, and tools in place to assess children's
speech and language skills and monitor progress is an essential component of
quality universal provision. Clear, documented processes will support consistent
and effective implementation.
Selecting targeted interventions
A range of universal and targeted interventions for speech, language, and
communication needs (SLCN) have been identified, though the strength and
quality of evidence varies. Notably, there are currently no available universal or
targeted interventions specifically for stammering, while two exist for speech
needs and sixteen for language needs.
For speech development, interventions focusing on phonological awareness and
speech recasts have moderate supporting evidence. For language needs, several
interventions are backed by strong evidence, including NELI, NELI Preschool,
Developing Talkers, the Educator-Implemented Storybook Vocabulary
Intervention, Happy Talk (quasi-experimental design), and Talk Boost.
When implementing interventions, early years practitioners should not dilute,
modify, or adapt interventions, as this can significantly reduce their effectiveness
(McCartney et al., 2011). The amount, frequency, and consistency with which
100
interventions were delivered in the research studies identified will likely be
required to see changes in children's outcomes.
Choosing targeted interventions with good supporting evidence that are the best fit
to the context and the child's needs will maximise intervention fidelity and child
outcomes. Contextual factors to consider when choosing an intervention include
staff capacity and skill mix, feasibility and practicality of delivery, training
requirements, and developmental appropriateness for the child's age (EEF, 2024).
There is the potential for harm if support strategies and approaches are not
delivered as intended. For example, when using Speech Recasts, the aim is to
provide the child with a clear model of the adult target without any additional
linguistic input. It is important that early years practitioners do not give the child
feedback about the accuracy of their speech or request that they copy the model.
Doing so may cause children to feel inadequate or that they have failed, potentially
damaging confidence and hindering progress.
Choosing the correct targeted support relies on identifying whether a child has
stammering, speech or language needs. Work Package 1: Identification and
assessment provides advice on how to make these judgements, however they are
not always straightforward. If practitioners are unsure how best to support a child
at the targeted level, or a child is not responding to intervention or support, advice
practitioners should seek advice from their local speech and language therapy
service. This allows for timely access to specialist input and promotes practitioners
ongoing development in applying targeted strategies (see Work Package 3:
Working together).
Children's progress and response to targeted interventions should be carefully and
regularly monitored and reviewed to ensure the child is benefiting. If a child is not
making progress after targeted support is delivered, this is an indication for
specialist referral; it may be that education practitioners can deliver further
specialist support in partnership with SLTs.
Supporting specific needs
Creating cultures within settings such that any and all modes of communication
are valued and celebrated and that children with stammering, speech or language
needs or differences do not feel stigmatised or excluded can promote optimal
inclusion and participation.
Although the evidence base for compensatory strategies is limited, both
professional guidelines and expert practitioner knowledge suggest several useful
approaches. These strategies aim to support children's full participation in
everyday interactions and learning experiences. Helpful strategies include:
101
Use of gesture by adults when speaking to children
Visual timetables and supports to successful communication
Strategies to support children to engage in play with peers (Beilinson and
Olswang, 2003)
Use of clarification strategies such as giving choices, and/or asking children
to point and show when communication breaks down
Early years practitioners should ensure they have a good level of knowledge and
understanding about what stammering is, how stammering can impact
communication and well-being, and how to support a child who stammers.
Providing the incorrect support risks exacerbating the child's difficulties and
causing emotional distress. Strategies which support a child who stammers
include:
Being patient, giving the child time to talk and finish what they are saying
Focusing on the content of what the child is saying (rather than whether it is
stammered or fluent)
Avoid correcting stammered speech or asking the child to repeat what they
are saying fluently.
Training
For the best available evidence to be implemented successfully, it is vital that the
children's workforce have the appropriate skills and knowledge, confidence, and shared
values.
To provide effective, 'Quality First', universal support for all children, all early years
practitioners need relevant knowledge of speech and language development, the
qualities of language-enriching environments, and strategies to enable their
implementation. To see behaviour changes in the nature of adult-child
interactions, coaching is a recommended component of such training.
Early years practitioners may need tools, skills, and resources to enable them to
be critical consumers of the evidence. This may be supported by the evidence
overview tables, quality indicators and intervention summaries within this review.
However, many practitioners will likely require more 'top-level summaries' to make
use of the relevant information in a form which enables them to make evidence-
informed judgements about quality.
Individuals with responsibility for stammering, speech or language support within a
setting would benefit from training regarding how to choose interventions
considering contextual fit, child's needs, and quality.
102
Future research
The outcomes of this review have highlighted a gap in the evidence base for universal
and targeted interventions for speech and stammering needs, particularly those that can
be delivered by non-specialist practitioners. While some interventions exist, much of the
current evidence is either more than a decade old, based on lower-quality study designs,
or focuses on interventions that require delivery by specialist professionals.
This gap highlights a pressing need for more robust research, particularly Randomised
Controlled Trials (RCTs) and quasi-experimental studies, to evaluate the effectiveness of
universal and targeted support strategies for speech and stammering that can be
implemented by practitioners in everyday early years settings. Strengthening the
evidence base in this area will be essential for developing accessible, effective, and
scalable support for children with speech and stammering needs.
Although sixteen language interventions were identified in this review, only a few were
supported by high-quality evidence. To ensure that children across all ages can access
effective support, there is a need for ongoing development and evaluation of both new
interventions and those with promising evidence but limited study quality. This work
should aim to produce well-designed, evidence-based interventions that are suitable for
use in a variety of early years settings, considering the diverse contextual factors and
practical constraints faced by practitioners.
Commercialised interventions, such as NELI, NELI Preschool, Talk Boost, and Story
Friends, have readily available materials, manuals, guidance, and training offers to
support practitioners. However, some interventions included in this review have been
supported by RCT or quasi-level evidence but are not commercialised, meaning training
and materials for these interventions are unavailable. This constrains the potential choice
of interventions available for implementation. To address this, research and development
funding is needed for all stages of intervention research, including the final stages
focused on implementation and roll-out.
It is not straightforward to create sustained behaviour change within early years settings
to enable practitioners to enact practices which support children with stammering,
speech, or language needs. Research is needed to develop and evaluate comprehensive
training and implementation packages to identify approaches which bring lasting benefits
for both settings and children.
103
Work package 3: Working together
Introduction
To answer the research questions related to working together, a rapid review of peer-
reviewed literature and resources published in reports or doctoral theses (known as grey
literature) was conducted. The available evidence was limited, and although many
localities in the UK work highly collaboratively, such practice knowledge is rarely
captured in published reports. Given this, a series of case studies to provide examples of
successful working together from practice were also completed.
When considering working together across organisations, it is important to acknowledge
how we are defining working together. We are using the following definitions of
collaboration, partnership, and parallel working:
Collaboration is when two or more people with different skills and knowledge work
effectively with each other to complete the same piece of work or to achieve the
same goal. The work evolves as each person contributes. The arrangement can
be informal, and collaborators may change during the work as they start or finish
their contribution. Collaborators may not have equal status in the relationship and
may not bear the same responsibility for completing the work or achieving the
goal.
Partnership is a more formal arrangement than a collaboration. There is a high
level of commitment and an expectation that the partnership will be long lasting.
Partners share risk and responsibility and contribute similar levels of expertise and
resource. Partnerships may facilitate several different collaborations and have
several projects or pieces of work at the same time.
Parallel working is when the different professionals work separately with the same
child/children, each contributing their specialist knowledge. Each professional
bears responsibility individually to achieve their goals, which may have been set
with no consultation with other professionals. Parents or caregivers may be more
involved with each professional in this model. Information about progress is
reported from the professional to the educational setting, other involved
professionals, and parent/caregiver. There may or may not be a two-way flow of
information.
Aims
Work package 3: Working together aims to explore different approaches to working
together to support children with stammering, speech, or language needs by addressing
the following research questions:
104
1. What examples are there of different models of collaboration between early years
settings with other professionals for identifying and providing support for children's
stammering, speech, or language needs. Other professionals include speech and
language therapists (SLTs), health visitors, educational psychologists (EPs) as
well as parents and caregivers.
2. What recommendations can be made about optimal components and
characteristics of collaboration between early years settings, other professionals,
and parents and caregivers, to support identification and intervention for children's
stammering, speech, or language needs?
Methods
Within the rapid literature review, nine peer-reviewed papers of relevance to working
together to support children with stammering, speech and language needs in the early
years were identified, along with five 'grey literature' sources. All sources were described
with respect to the evidence base, and data extracted and summarised with respect to
target cohort characteristics; evidence of knowledge exchange; training content and
availability; assessment and intervention content; effectiveness; evidence of
sustainability/normalisation; flexibility and tracking through universal, targeted, specialist
intervention pathways. Data extraction tables summarising the data for each source can
be found in the Supplementary Evidence Report.
For the case studies, interviews were analysed using qualitative framework analysis
based on the theoretical domains framework (TDF) (Cane et al., 2012) and mapped onto
the COM-B model (Michie et al., 2011). Detailed methods and their rationale are
described in detail in the Methodology Report.
The case studies of good practice in working together to support children with speech
and language needs in the early years demonstrate that different approaches can be
effective. Each locality has different needs, the services are organised differently and the
professionals that come together bring different knowledge and expertise. Each approach
is unique, yet there are commonalities across them. Localities that aim to develop their
own model of working together may find that one of these examples will meet their needs
or that parts from each example will best fit their context. Although they were all different
origin, development and execution, there are strong common themes between them all.
Participants came from the North East, Midlands, East Anglia, and South of England
(Table 14). All speech and language therapy services were part of an NHS Trust. The
early years settings were either part of the local authority (2), an Academy Trust (1) or
from the private, voluntary, or independent (PVI) sector (2). We interviewed six speech
language therapists, two educational psychologists, one early years director, two local
authority early years team professionals, and four of the early years settings managers.
105
The local authorities and speech and language therapy services in the case studies
serve large geographical areas and varied socio-economic populations. The following
information is taken from the English Indices of Deprivation 2019. At the time of
conducting this work, there were 151 upper-tier local authorities. The local authority
ranked '1' is the least deprived and the local authority ranked '151' is the most deprived.
Wealth is not evenly distributed however, and there are areas of deprivation within large
geographical areas.
Within a Local Authority, the proportion of areas (known as Lower-layer Super Output
Areas (LSOAs)) that fall into the 10% most deprived nationally are also ranked. The rank
of 1 indicated the most deprived. Local authorities that rank 0 have no areas that fall into
the 10% most deprived. The lower the score, the more deprived; and likewise, the higher
the score, the less deprived.
Table 14. Case study location and indices of deprivation (National Statistics, 2019)
Local Authority
Average IMD Rank/151
Proportion in most 10%
deprived Rank/151
Hampshire
136
118
Cambridgeshire
129
112
Northumberland
84
55
Stoke-on-Trent
13
11
Staffordshire
115
105
Sandwell
8
36
The rapid review findings
The important of working together
Within the evidence reviewed, there was a clear motivation for professionals from
different organisations to collaborate in supporting children with speech, language, and
communication needs (SLCN), as well as their parents and caregivers. In every example
of collaborative working, all partners recognised the importance of speech, language, and
communication to ensure that every child succeeds in life. Socio-economic disadvantage
was highlighted as a significant risk factor (e.g., Gibbard and Smith, 2016; Harmey et al.,
2022; Smith et al., 2017). Another crucial factor was the key role of caregivers and the
home environment in language development (Harmey et al., 2022; McDonald et al.,
2015; Smith et al., 2017).
All studies and reports considered addressing SLCN a priority. Working together helps
"to shift speech, language, and communication away from just being seen as an issue for
106
individual services to being seen as everybody's issue" (EIF, 2020 East Sussex case
study, p.8). Professionals across different services in local authorities, whose roles
involve interacting with young children and their families, typically have an excellent
understanding of local needs, particularly in relation to SLCN and disadvantage. This
includes early years services and settings (nurseries, schools, PVIs), speech and
language therapy services, educational psychology services, and public health (Public
Health England, 2020).
This understanding, coupled with the imperative for a joined-up, multi-agency approach,
drives collaboration (Donald et al., 2022; EIF, 2020; McKean et al., 2017a; Hope, 2020;
Public Health England, 2020). By working together, professionals are empowered to
transform practice through shared knowledge (Harmey et al., 2022), a concept McKean
et al. (2017a) refer to as "networked professionalism" (p.31).
How collaboration works: who is involved and what it entails
A range of professionals work with parents and caregivers to facilitate and provide
support for children with SLCN. Studies indicate that training and methods of working
together are tailored to local needs. Effective collaboration occurs at multiple levels,
involving strategic oversight (politicians, commissioners, Heads of Service), professionals
working directly with young children and their families, and parents or caregivers. Local
structures are necessary to ensure this happens (Donald et al., 2022; EIF, 2020; McKean
et al., 2017a; Public Health England, 2020).
For example, East Sussex established an integrated 0-5 Health Child Programme
involving health visitors, Children's Centres, family key workers, and Early
Communication Support Workers, all operating under a single management structure.
Public Health funding was used flexibly to co-fund the service (EIF, 2020). Similarly,
Luton Council introduced its "Talking Takes Off" programme as part of its 0-5 years
strategy. Universal and tailored training was provided from political and strategic leaders
down to early years practitioners, volunteers, and parents/caregivers (Donald et al.,
2022, p. 444-45).
Training and resources are frequently developed collaboratively by local authorities
(typically early years and School Improvement services), NHS Speech and Language
Therapy services, Educational Psychology services, Family Hubs (formerly Children's
Centres), early years settings, Health Visitors, and community nursery nurses (Donald et
al., 2022; EIF, 2020; Public Health England, 2020). This training covers a variety of
interventions and approaches, including modelling, coaching, video reflection, peer-to-
peer learning, communities of practice, and shadowing (Grauberg, 2024; EIF, 2020
Kingston case study & Warwickshire case study; Harmey et al., 2022; Hope, 2020;
McDonald et al., 2015; Smith et al., 2017; McKean et al., 2023).
107
Developing a highly skilled early years workforce, including Health Visitors, midwives,
and community nursery nurses (EIF, 2020), is essential to effectively identifying
developmental delays and providing early intervention. Additionally, upskilling parents
and caregivers (Gibbard & Smith, 2016) ensures they understand typical development,
recognise potential concerns early (EIF, 2020), and apply language-promoting strategies
at home (Kent & McDonald, 2021; McDonald et al., 2015). The adoption of universal
approaches alongside increased awareness, knowledge, and training supports the
speech, language, and communication development of all children. Crucially, it also helps
refine referral processes, ensuring that only children needing specialist support are
referred; "the right children, at the right time" (EIF, 2020 East Sussex case study, p.8).
Collaborative services play a vital role in training professionals, equipping caregivers, and
ensuring that "joint messages around early speech, language, and communication" are
effectively shared (Public Health England, 2020, p.9). By working together, professionals
ensure that every child receives the best possible foundation for communication and
learning.
Examples of collaboration between SLTs and other professionals working with young
children include Talking 2gether (McKean et al., 2023), Launchpad for Language
(Grauberg, 2024; McDonald et al., 2015), NNUTS (Hope, 2020), The Language Lead
Approach (Kent and McDonald, 2019; Kent and McDonald, 2021; McDonald and Kent,
2022), Language for Life (McKean et al., 2017a), Babytalk Home Visiting (Smith et al.,
2017), and Manor Park Talks (Harmey et al., 2022). The focus of training in these
examples include:
Typical language development and key milestones
Communication-friendly environments
Identifying and supporting children with language difficulties
Specific interventions
Communication strategies
Language modelling and activities
Supporting parents, caregivers, and colleagues
Different interaction styles
Using screening tools and referral pathways
Creating communication leads
The effect of the home environment
108
Training is frequently co-planned and co-delivered. In Norfolk, for example, early years
advisers collaborated with speech and language therapy services to deliver joint training
for professionals. Meanwhile, in the Northumbria Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust-
Newcastle University's Universal, Targeted and Specialist (NNUTS) framework involved
a Knowledge Transfer Partnership Research SLT who worked within an early years
setting to provide training and ongoing support to staff.
Working together also extends to caregivers, as evidenced in Talking Takes Off (Donald
et al., 2022), The Enhanced Parent-Based Intervention (Gibbard & Smith, 2016), and
Talking 2gether (McKean et al., 2023). These programmes aim to empower parents by
raising their confidence, improving their understanding of SLCN, and providing them with
practical strategies to support language development at home. Several initiatives co-
produce resources with parents/caregivers, ensuring accessibility. For example, the "Just
One Norfolk" Healthy Child Programme digital platform was designed with input from
parents to accommodate low literacy levels and multiple languages (EIF, 2020 Norfolk
case study, p.11)
Impact on early years practitioners
The impact of collaborative working on early years practitioners are predominantly
evidenced through surveys and interviews, which capture self-reported experiences. One
study (McDonald et al., 2015) systematically videoed practitioners working with SLTs and
early years specialist teachers, analysing interactions using a fidelity tool (CRAFT). While
the study found notable improvements in two communication-facilitating strategies, there
were no significant changes in language modelling or a reduction in conversation-
hindering behaviours. More experienced practitioners showed the most change, albeit
modest. Self-reported survey data indicated increases in practitioner confidence, with
scores improving from a median of 3 to 8 out of 10.
Several other studies highlight similar findings regarding improved confidence among
early years practitioners engaged in collaborative work (Grauberg, 2024; Public Health
England, 2020). The Talking Takes Off programme (Donald et al., 2022) found that
survey and interview responses reflected notable increases in practitioner confidence,
feelings of empowerment, and a better understanding of the developmental stages of
speech, language, and communication. Additionally, practitioners demonstrated
improved knowledge of speech, language, and communication, typical child
development, and strategies for fostering a communication-friendly environment (Donald
et al., 2022; EIF, 2020 Warwickshire case study; McDonald et al., 2015).
Collaboration has also influenced referral patterns. Several studies reported that working
together led to more relevant referrals to SLT services (Donald et al., 2022; EIF, 2020
Norfolk case study; Kent & McDonald, 2019; McKean et al., 2023). In the Talking Takes
Off project, early years practitioners stated that staff in their settings were now more likely
109
to work with a child before referring them to an SLT (Donald et al., 2022, p.468). In
Norfolk, working together approaches increased settings' capacity to implement
evidence-based interventions before referring children for specialist support (EIF, 2020
Norfolk case study, p.5). East Sussex's model, where Early Communication Support
Workers led by a Children's Centre teacher supported speech and language
development, resulted in almost all referrals to the speech and language therapy service
being deemed appropriate (EIF, 2020 East Sussex case study, p.11t). Early years
practitioners also valued the opportunity to collaborate in decision-making during referrals
(Hope, 2020; Public Health England, 2020).
Beyond direct skill development, collaborative working fosters stronger relationships
between early years practitioners and professional partners, peers, and parents.
Practitioners develop a better understanding of each other's roles and expertise,
enhancing their ability to work together effectively (EIF, 2020; McKean et al., 2017).
Knowledge exchange opportunities also emerge. For example, in Doncaster, multi-
agency training brought different professions together, enabling collaboration between
schools, PVI settings, and Family Hub practitioners (EIF, 2020 Doncaster case study,
p.9).
Impact on children aged 0-5 years
Several studies provide evidence of the positive impact of collaborative working on
children's speech, language, and communication skills. Improvements were assessed
using standardised tools and pre- and post-intervention testing (EIF, 2020; Hope, 2020;
Gibbard & Smith, 2016). Sample sizes varied significantly, ranging from 8 children in the
Enhanced Parent-Based Intervention (Gibbard & Smith, 2016) to 2,679 children in the
Greater Manchester Early Years Speech, Language and Communication Pathway (EIF,
2020).
Commonly used assessment tools to measure improvements, by early years
practitioners, included:
Early Communication Screen (Stoke Speaks Out, EIF, 2020)
WellComm Screen (Warwickshire-Talking Takes Off/Closing the Gap project,
Greater Manchester Early Years Speech, Language and Communication
Pathway, EIF, 2020)
Ages and Stages Questionnaire (ASQ) (Greater Manchester Early Years Speech,
Language and Communication Pathway, EIF, 2020)
Preschool Language Scales 4 UK (PLS 4 UK) (Enhanced Parent-Based
Intervention, Gibbard & Smith, 2016)
British Picture Vocabulary Scale 3 (BPVS 3)
110
Early Years Foundation Stage Profile (EYFSP) Development Matters (DfE, 2008
Diagnostic Evaluation of Articulation and Phonology (DEAP) Diagnostic Screen
(Hope, 2020)
Studies with empirical testing consistently demonstrated positive effects, including
increased numbers of children meeting expected communication milestones after
interventions. Warwickshire-Talking Takes Off project showed an improvement from 18%
to 44% in children meeting benchmarks, while those needing specialist referrals dropped
from 47% to 24% (EIF, 2020, p.15). The Enhanced Parent-Based Intervention recorded
an increase in mean expressive language scores from 75 to 90 (Gibbard & Smith, 2016).
The NNUTS programme demonstrated that multi-tiered collaborative working could help
children develop language skills sufficiently to no longer be classified as "at risk" (Hope,
2020, p. 158).
Qualitative findings also show positive outcomes, including increased happiness
(Gibbard & Smith, 2016), confidence (Donald et al., 2022), reduced frustration (Gibbard &
Smith, 2016), and improved communication ability (Donald et al., 2022; EIF, 2020
Doncaster case study; McKean, 2023). Additional benefits include children talking more
frequently (Gibbard & Smith, 2016; Hussain et al., 2020), an increase in book reading
and enjoyment (Hussain et al., 2020), and overall improvements in communication levels
(EIF, 2020: Doncaster, East Sussex, Norfolk case studies).
Impact on parents and caregivers
Studies examining the impact of collaborative working on parents and caregivers,
primarily through interviews and surveys, highlight several positive outcomes. Parents
reported gaining improved knowledge of language development and communication
(Donald et al., 2022; Gibbard & Smith, 2016) and a greater awareness of developmental
milestones and their child's difficulties (Gibbard & Smith, 2016). Collaborative training
also equipped them with better strategies to support their child's speech and language
development, including interactive play and modelling techniques (Donald et al., 2022;
Smith et al., 2017).
Additionally, stronger relationships between parents and their children emerged as a
result of more frequent interactions and enhanced communication (Gibbard & Smith,
2016). Parents also experienced increased confidence and self-esteem, which positively
impacted their social engagement with other parents and children (Donald et al., 2022;
Gibbard & Smith, 2016). Engagement with intervention programmes improved, with
higher attendance rates linked to collaborative efforts between speech and language
therapy services, Children's Centre staff, and caregivers, as seen in the Enhanced
Parent-Based Intervention (Gibbard & Smith, 2016). Furthermore, parents expressed that
working together helped them feel listened to, empowering them to better advocate for
their child's needs (EIF, 2020 Norfolk case study).
111
Key characteristics of successful working together
Although no single study in the review provides a detailed blueprint for working together,
key characteristics have been identified as contributing to success.
One of the most crucial factors is the relationships developed between partners, built on
trust, respect, and open communication (EIF, 2020 Kingston case study; Kent &
McDonald, 2019; McDonald & Kent, 2022; McKean et al., 2017a). Several studies
highlight the importance of respecting each other's expertise and understanding different
roles and contexts. For instance, the Enhanced Parent-Based Intervention (EPBI) in
Portsmouth was designed using parents' and caregivers' input. Unlike the original Parent-
Based Intervention (PBI), which was solely delivered by NHS SLTs in a health centre, the
EPBI was developed collaboratively with Children's Centre teachers and conducted
within a Children's Centre setting. The addition of a crèche and home visits significantly
improved parents' and caregivers' attendance and engagement (Gibbard & Smith, 2016).
Respecting the contributions of all participants fosters effective collaboration. In the
Manor Park Talks project (Harmey et al., 2022), early years practitioners partnered with
university researchers to deepen their understanding of SLCN. This approach created a
community of practice in which practitioners' expertise was valued equally alongside
academic research (p.5). Their feedback led to refinements in strategies, making them
more practical for implementation.
While training and short-term interventions are valuable, sustained working relationships
require ongoing professional development and knowledge exchange. Providing
opportunities for networking and co-constructing professional knowledge ensures
continued collaboration and support (McKean et al., 2017a, p.525; EIF, 2020 East
Sussex case study). The Coaching Early Conversations, Interaction, and Language
project (Grauberg, 2024) found that continuous coaching significantly aided the effective
implementation of evidence-based language interventions in early years settings,
including in the PVI sector (p.10, Grauberg, 2024). In the NNUTS project (Hope, 2020),
an embedded SLT provided ongoing staff support beyond initial training, which teachers
found extremely useful in discussing children's needs and making informed decisions
(p.102).
Support structures also play a vital role in sustaining collaboration. In East Sussex, Early
Communication Support Workers receive training, telephone support, and termly
supervision from the Speech and Language Therapy service, funded by Public Health
(EIF, 2020 East Sussex case study, p.10). Similarly, Nottinghamshire and Preston
models of the Sutton Trust's Coaching Early Conversations project included regular
network sessions for early years settings to share practice, engage in peer learning, and
access local resources (Grauberg, 2024, p.27).
112
Strong leadership within early years settings is another key factor in successful
collaboration. Senior leaders and managers who actively support joint efforts enable their
teams to work effectively (EIF, 2020; Grauberg, 2020; Kent & McDonald, 2021). McKean
et al. (2017) emphasise the importance of "empowering leadership," which provides staff
with the autonomy to negotiate and take action (p.521). Leadership also plays a role in
ensuring practitioners have the necessary time and resources for collaborative activities,
such as attending meetings, networking events, and training sessions (McDonald & Kent,
2022).
A shared commitment to norms and values, with children at the centre of collaboration, is
another identified characteristic (McKean, 2017). Studies emphasise that staff continuity
and low turnover strengthen relationships and embed knowledge effectively (Kent &
McDonald, 2021; McKean et al., 2017). Long-term relationships make it easier to bridge
professional boundaries, facilitating smoother collaboration (McKean et al., 2017, p.521).
Additionally, meaningful parent and caregiver engagement ensures they are active
participants in their children's development (Gibbard & Smith, 2016; McKean et al.,
2023).
Early years practitioners must also feel a sense of agency and ownership in collaborative
efforts (Kent & McDonald, 2021; McKean et al., 2017). Allowing adequate time for
effective joint working ensures sustainable outcomes (Kent & McDonald, 2021). Flexibility
is also crucial to adapt collaboration to local needs and context (Kent & McDonald, 2021;
McKean et al., 2017). This is evidenced in the co-design of training programmes, such as
Coaching Early Conversations (Grauberg, 2024) and the bespoke training developed in
the Learning Lead Approach (Kent & McDonald, 2021) and Manor Park Talks (Harmey et
al., 2022).
Service co-location also strengthens partnerships. In Kingston, SLTs share a base with
Health Visitors, offer training, and have set up a shared digital folder for joint resources,
information, and advice (EIF, 2020 Kingston case study, p.6).
Barriers to effective collaborative working
Despite the benefits, various barriers can impact the success of collaborative working.
One of the key issues is staff turnover, particularly in nursery and PVI settings, alongside
staff sickness (Kent & McDonald, 2021; Grauberg, 2024). High turnover disrupts
relationships, consistency in training, and knowledge retention. For example, in the
Coaching Early Conversations Merseyside project (Grauberg, 2020), two trained
practitioners left before coaching began, undermining programme sustainability.
Lack of time is another challenge, as professionals struggle to balance collaborative work
with their existing roles. The Learning Lead Approach (Kent & McDonald, 2021;
113
McDonald & Kent, 2022) revealed that both SLTs and early years practitioners cited time
constraints as a barrier. SLTs found it difficult to balance clinical responsibilities with
mentoring duties, while Language Leads reported missing training and networking due to
staff shortages (McDonald & Kent, 2022, p.506).
Interviews in studies also revealed that some professionals felt unprepared for
collaborative roles. SLTs noted that their clinical training had not fully prepared them for
multi-agency collaboration (Kent & McDonald, 2021, p.94). Despite recognising the value
of joint working, some participants were required to take on responsibilities beyond their
expertise (McDonald & Kent, 2022).
The case study findings
The case studies of good practice in working together to support children with speech
and language needs in the early years demonstrate that different approaches can be
effective. Each locality has different needs, the services are organised differently and the
professionals that come together bring different knowledge and expertise. Each approach
is unique, yet there are commonalities across them. Localities that aim to develop their
own model of working together may find that one of these examples will meet their needs
or that parts from each example will best fit their context.
A summary of the five working together case studies is presented here. Although they
were all different origin, development and execution, there are strong common themes
between them all.
The aims of working together
The aim of all the examples of working together is to provide timely and good quality
support to children with speech and language needs to increase their long-term life
chances. Children and parents and caregivers are at the centre of all models of working
together.
In areas where the speech and language therapy service engage with the early years
settings, there is always at least one named SLT working with the early years settings.
Speech and language therapy provided by NHS SLTs is free at the point of access. All
the examples of working together in these case studies aim to optimise the NHS speech
and language therapy offer by integrating speech and language goals into the early years
settings daily routine. Importantly, some speech and language therapy services in
England only engage with referred children, meaning opportunities to utilise resources in
early years settings could be currently missed.
114
Leadership
In most cases, the 'working together' has been led by senior representatives from at least
two of the services involved. When strategic planning occurs at the management level of
the organisations working together, there is a better chance that the arrangement will be
sustainable over years and even decades. Leadership from the speech and language
therapy service manager or a designated lead SLT is crucial for integration of universal,
targeted and specialist interventions to make best use of resources.
In the early years settings, the manager, head teacher, or early years director typically
lead the strategic planning and co-ordinated implementation. The EP's input is partly
influenced by their statutory duties and the development of Service Level Agreements
(SLA) with early years settings. There is one example amongst the case studies of SLT
leadership that is also supported by an SLA.
Intervention programmes and tracking progress
All early years settings in the case studies have well trained staff who can confidently
implement interventions at universal level. Quality First Teaching was mentioned by some
of the early years settings as central to their approach. An enriched language
environment is the most common universal intervention. Some early years settings use
the CSCOT to measure the quality of the language environment. Makaton is used in
some early years settings to support communication.
Some early years settings have targeted interventions that are delivered to small groups
or individual children. The children receiving targeted intervention are identified by the
early years settings in partnership with parents and caregivers, SLTs and/or EPs following
detailed observation and some assessment. There is a mixture of locally and nationally
devised interventions, supported by varying degrees of evidence. Interventions include
It's Time to Talk, Time to Listen and It's More Time to Talk (Stoke Speaks Out); The Big
Book of Ideas and Talking Tips (Wellcomm); Talk Boost; Early Talk Boost; Elklan
resources; Newcastle Intervention for Phonological Awareness (NIPA); and Colourful
Semantics.
Each early years setting was confident of the effectiveness of their interventions because
children's progress and response to intervention is tracked. This tracking is usually a
combination of detailed day to day observation and record keeping and periodic
assessment or completion of a checklist. For children in Reception Class, the Early Years
Foundation Stage (EYFS) Profile is used to track progress. Other sources used to track
progress in our case studies are: Development Matters (DfE); What to expect, when?
(4Children, supported by DfE); the WellComm screen; and the Stoke Speaks Out Early
Communication Screening tool.
115
Capability: Knowledge and skills
A knowledgeable and skilled workforce will be successful in delivering interventions for
children with speech and language needs. A willingness to share knowledge and
experience between organisations is fundamental to success.
Shared knowledge is crucial amongst the early years settings and SLTs who are working
together to effectively support children with speech and language needs. This shared
knowledge includes knowledge of:
Speech and language development
Risk factors for speech and language delay or disorder
How speech and language delay or disorder can be identified
How effective universal and targeted interventions can be delivered in early years
settings within the limits of funding and government policy.
Early years settings and the SLTs who work with them have a good knowledge and
understanding of the needs of the local area, its children, and their families. There is
shared knowledge about the children between early years settings staff, parents, and
caregivers, SLTs, Health Visitors and EPs. Amongst the case studies there are examples
of knowledge sharing being mutually beneficial to early years settings and SLTs. The
early years settings provide training for SLTs whilst the SLTs provide training for the early
years settings staff. The following actions promote this knowledge exchange: spending
time with each other, observing each other's practice, discussing children, and planning
together.
In some of the case studies there is strategic sharing of knowledge across all
professionals who are working with young children and their families. This enables a
consistent message about speech and language development for families, irrespective of
the service they are accessing. This consistent messaging is reinforced by access to a
central source of online information for parents/caregivers. This type of shared
knowledge arises out of high-level strategic collaboration.
Training and knowledge of interventions
Early years settings have access to several sources of training. Where there is a
structured model of working together in the case studies there is a structured training
offer for early years settings at regular times, such as at induction or via termly updates.
Examples of this are: Stoke Speaks Out, Sandwell Keeps Talking and the Northumbria
Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust-Newcastle University Universal, Targeted and
Specialist (NNUTS) Framework. In the case studies, all the early years settings have
some bespoke training that is dependent on need identified by the early years setting
and/or the SLT or EP. This is usually related to the need of individual children or to
116
address larger issues that arise. For example: identifying bilingual children who are
struggling to learn English as opposed to those who also struggle in their home
language.
There are examples of different types of supervision and coaching such as:
Early years staff observe SLTs or EP sessions
The SLT and EP will observe the early years setting staff in practice
Early years staff meet with individuals or small groups to talk through their
practice.
The professionals who run these sessions stressed the importance of valuing the early
years settings staff's experience and knowledge of the children. They also stressed the
importance of building the early years setting staff's confidence in delivering interventions
with clarity.
The early years settings staff also have access to training provided by the speech and
language therapy service, educational psychology service, local authority or external
provide such as ELKLAN. Some of this training is free but some has to be paid for.
Knowledge of when and how to refer for specialist support
The universal and targeted interventions are an opportunity to gather information about
the child's difficulties to inform referral to speech and language therapy for specialist
input. In the most effective and efficient examples of working together, SLTs worked with
the early years settings to support unreferred children through universal and targeted
intervention to referral. This effective collaborative working made ensures that referrals to
speech and language therapy services were appropriate and that if the referral is
appropriate then it is supported by sufficiently detailed information. It also ensures that
any specialist input for the referral was provided in a timely manner.
The speech and language therapy services which provided us with information about
their offer for children who stammer have fast tracks for these children. In this fast-track
pathway, the Health Visitor and early years settings staff know to refer these children and
where to signpost parents and caregivers for initial support while the referral is in
process. Moreover, within the fast-track pathway children are seen individually for
specialist assessment and intervention is needs led, with a focus on developing
parent/caregiver knowledge and skills. All SLTs have competence in this scenario with
expert supervision and mentoring when required.
Gathering data about children
Each early years setting has an agreed and explicit process for gathering information
about children. This ensures that the information is available to all staff working with the
117
child. It also crucially ensures that consistent support can be provided to the child.
Parents/caregivers are always part of this gathering of information about the child. From
before they enter the early years settings, children have their data collected so that
parental knowledge and any concerns can inform future observations of the child.
Learning and developmental trajectories are tracked so that children with additional
needs can be identified and supported at an early stage. Most early years settings have
an additional record for children who have identified additional need that supports the
collection of information for a referral to specialist services. The effectiveness of
intervention is also tracked and if children are not progressing as expected this can be
quickly identified.
Sharing knowledge with parents and caregivers
Each of the early years settings in these case studies had robust and often multiple ways
of communicating with parents/caregivers. The Tapestry online journal was popular with
early years settings with its guaranteed confidentiality and option to share information
with chosen others. Other observation and progress records are shared with
parents/caregivers if their child has additional needs. Person Centred Planning
(Hampshire) is an example of parents/caregivers being well prepared and facilitated to
engage in information sharing and decision making.
Supporting each other
Effective support for children with speech and language needs relies on good
relationships between the people involved, allocated time and easily available resources.
Together these provide opportunity to deliver different types of high-quality support.
The individuals involved in the case studies have respect for and value each other's
knowledge and skills. There is a good understanding that everyone works better together,
and the children are better supported.
Supporting parents and caregivers
Support for parents and caregivers is forefront in all the case studies. Care is taken to
ensure parents and caregivers are listened to and supported. There is an example of an
early years settings (Stoke) with a Parent Champion Group who work as collaborators
with the early years setting, discussing issues that have been raised by parents and
caregivers or the early years setting. Some Parent Champions can also act as peer
support for other parents/caregivers. Training may be available for parents and
caregivers (Sandwell) to help them better support their children.
Resources for universal and targeted interventions
In each of the case study early years settings, resources are available for the delivery of
interventions. Early years settings make best use of freely available resources and
118
strategically plan purchases throughout the year. Early years setting staff may have
protected time for planning and delivery of target interventions. However, this will always
be a challenge if there are staff absences or vacancies. Most early years settings have a
space in the setting for small groups or individuals to receive intervention.
Sustainability
The factors that make the partnership working or collaborations sustainable include:
Support by the most senior level of management in all involved organisations
Respectful and open dialogue between all partners
Well-structured processes for identification of children who need additional support
and delivery of the required support
A service level agreement (SLA) to involve highly specialist input over and above
the NHS free offer of speech and language therapy
Regular reviewing and updating of protocols and processes
Evidence that the children are improving.
The main threat to sustained partnership working is staff instability and shortages,
leading to loss of experience and knowledge about the children and the early years
settings. Change to educational priorities and funding may also pose a threat to
sustainable partnership working.
Motivation: Confidence and belief
Working together to support children with speech and language needs requires the
people involved to have confidence in their knowledge and skills and belief that what they
are doing will make a positive difference to the children's speech and language.
In all case studies the early years setting staff were confident in their ability to deliver
interventions to a high degree of fidelity or accuracy They were confident when talking to
parents and caregivers. Easy access to other early years setting staff and to specialist
such as SLTs and EPs for support and to answer questions also increases the early
years setting staff's confidence.
In all case studies the degree of mutual trust was excellent. Each individual was
confident in the other's ability to solve problems or develop resources or procedures.
Each other's knowledge is valued as contributing something to the support for the child.
The SLTs are confident that referrals to speech and language therapy are appropriate.
All members of the team around the child are motivated by seeing the child's progress.
Therefore, it is crucial that the child's progress is recorded objectively and in detail.
119
Engaging with parents and caregivers
All the early years settings in the case studies had a good understanding of the needs of
parents/caregivers and how to best engage with them. There was a combination of face
to face and online contact to keep parents/caregivers updated on their child's progress.
Parents/caregivers are involved in all decision making and goal setting for their child.
They are provided with training to best support their child at home. The home languages
of children are explored by early years settings and valued. Bilingual staff in the early
years settings will work with same language families. Where required, interpreters are
engaged to enable home language conversations with parents/caregivers.
Conclusions
There are limited studies that provide specific details about the processes involved in
working together, making it difficult to replicate these practices. Few studies explore the
impacts on children's speech, language, and communication through rigorous testing,
with many drawing on the perceptions of parents/caregivers and practitioners and
therefore not evidencing any change that may be taking place. The use of interviews and
survey data in many studies relies on self-reported perceived impacts, and participants
are typically self-selecting. The study by McDonald et al. (2015) highlights one of the
limitations of self-reporting. Their analysis of a video recording of an early years
practitioner after brief speech and language therapy training (Let's Interact), found 'no
meaningful changes in her interaction behaviour', yet the practitioner reported increased
confidence in using interaction strategies in practice' (p314). McDonald et al. conclude
that 'self-reported changes in skills and confidence are not sufficient to accurately
evaluate changes in behaviour following training' (p.314).
The nature of the studies means that sample sizes are often (necessarily) small and
group sizes inconsistent, making statistical analysis of the significance of results
challenging or even impossible. The grey literature review case studies in particular,
whilst providing descriptions and outcomes, do not provide detailed information about
methods or exactly how data was collected. Only the PhD thesis of Hope (2020)
demonstrated robust data collection in terms of methodology, methods, and findings but
detail about the collaborative approach was missing as were the views of practitioners - a
limitation identified by the author.
In the majority of the studies reviewed, the authors are aware of these limitations and
what Kent and McDonald (2019) describe as the problems that commissioners
consequently face when 'clear evidence of the efficacy of an approach is required (p 5).
The following conclusions are synthesised from the 'working together' rapid literature
review and case studies. It is clear from the case studies that effective partnership
working between speech and language therapy services and early years settings benefit
120
children with stammering, speech, and/or language needs. This is supported by the
findings of the rapid review of the literature. Working together supports services to make
best use of available resources to support children with stammering, speech, and
language needs. Furthermore, where there is good partnership working between
professionals, parents and caregivers are also better supported to understand their
child's needs and how they can help.
Types of working together
The approach to working together varied across the literature review and case studies,
as they are often constructed to meet their local need. Local needs, resources, and
organisations differ in each case, whilst certain elements remain consistent. For example,
in some areas, local authorities or multi-academy trusts led the working together for
educational settings. While in other local area examples, individual educational settings
directly liaise with the speech and language therapy services. Although the structure of
the working together and resource sharing differs, the intended outcome remains the
same which is to enhance outcomes for children through shared knowledge and
resources. Despite the differences in the way services develop working together in
different localities, there are similar behavioural outcomes such as: organisations work
together, pooling knowledge, experience, and resources, to improve attainment and life
chances for children with stammering, speech, and language needs.
Partnership working is most frequently observed between speech and language therapy
services, early years settings, and other educational settings (including primary,
secondary, and special) to provide integrated support for children with speech and
language needs.
Collaborative and parallel working were also observed in all contexts found in the review
and the case studies. However, they were more frequently found within education and
health services that support aspects of children's development, health, and wellbeing,
which overlap with or impact on stammering, speech, and language. Collaboration and
parallel working are common with Educational Psychologists; special education provision
and teachers of the Deaf; Community Nursing, including Health Visitors and specialist
children's nurses; other Allied Health Professionals including Physiotherapists,
Occupational Therapists and Audiologists; paediatricians, Ear Nose and Throat (ENT)
surgeons, cranio-facial surgeons, and psychiatrists. In all these instances, the SLTs lead
on all aspects of stammering, speech, and language, whilst others provide specialist
input in their own areas of expertise. This is often for children with more complex needs
or disability and includes children whose needs are not identified until later in childhood
or adolescence. Consequently, there is little mention of these other professionals in the
case studies, where the focus is on children with stammering, and/or speech and
language needs in early years settings, rather than specific groups of children with
121
additional needs. In the literature review, where broader 0-5 services are considered,
there is more information about a wider range of professionals.
The importance of leadership
The involvement of leaders at management level of the organisations is crucial to ensure
that the principles of working together are strategically embedded in policy. In this way
staff are encouraged and supported to work together across organisations. Ideally, senior
leaders will identify key staff in each organisation who will lead the working together
locally. Where it is sustainable and resistant to organisational or staff changes, working
together is embedded in strategy and policy. Senior members of staff in the early years
setting and the speech and language therapy service work collaboratively to identify local
need and how best to meet it. There are examples of successful partnership and
collaborative working in the case studies that were developed to meet different types of
need. They result in more efficient use of available resources as universal and targeted
interventions are implemented and more children are supported.
Training
Training for both early years settings and speech and language therapy staff is shown to
be a valuable contribution to successful working together. This is best framed as
knowledge exchange or sharing, and ranges from formal training to individual
conversations focused on individual children. Training is best tailored to individual needs.
Early years settings generally benefit from training in speech and language development
and how to identify children at risk; how to implement chosen interventions and how to
support children who stammer. Speech language therapists, however, benefit from social
capital training to enhance their relationship building, advocacy and networking within
early years settings and shared knowledge about external pressures and drivers for the
early years settings and curriculum content, so that they can effectively advise on
universal and targeted interventions.
Shared knowledge
For the most effective service structure and delivery, early years settings and SLTs
and/or EPs in the case studies work together to share their knowledge about the needs
of the children and families in their locality. They also agree how to best meet the child's
needs. If these relationships do not already exist, it may be necessary for the early years
settings to open dialogue with the speech language therapy service about referrals and
joint support for children with stammering and/or speech and language needs. Similarly,
speech and language therapy services would have access to more of the resources they
need to provide high intensity interventions that best benefit children with stammering,
122
speech, and language needs. This would be done by working in partnership with early
years settings and involving parents/caregivers more strategically.
Including parents and caregivers
Parents and caregivers are successfully engaged in appropriately supporting their child
with stammering, speech, and language needs where knowledge of the child is
effectively shared and parents and/or caregivers are facilitated to share their own
knowledge and experience. Mechanisms can be put in place for sharing information
about children that facilitates developing goals or targets with parents/caregivers and
SLTs. For example: meetings with explicitly supportive structures so that
parents/caregivers feel confident that they have a role and will be listened to.
Data collection and monitoring
In the case studies, there are consistent examples of early years settings working
together with SLTs and EPs to ensure that data collection to track children's progress is
robust and systematic. Involvement of specialists in planning the universal and targeted
levels of intervention helps to streamline data collection about progress and working
towards goals. The early years settings are clear as to the quality and nature of data
required to make a referral to the specialist services. Parents/caregivers are involved in
the provision of data about their child. Parents/caregivers of bilingual children should be
facilitated to provide information about their child's use of their home language.
Bilingualism/home languages
Knowledge of the child's home language and any impact on their use of English is shared
between early years settings, SLTs, EPs and parents/caregivers. Early years settings in
the case studies had strategies for supporting bilingual children and valuing their home
cultures. Open dialogues with parents/caregivers to best support bilingual children is also
be used to identify children who are struggling to learn their home language and who
may need targeted intervention or referral to speech and language therapy.
Opportunity: Relationships and resources
Supporting each other
The relationships built between the working together partners are crucial to their success.
Respect for each other's knowledge and expertise and understanding of different roles in
supporting children with stammering, speech and language needs are important factors.
Training in social capital for SLTs specifically helps them to effectively engage early
years settings to identify need and support universal and targeted interventions.
Knowledge of local contexts and respect for each other all contribute positively to how
partners support each other. There are some examples of staff, often teaching/support
123
assistants who are linked together by the SLT or early years settings' senior leadership,
into staff support groups who share resources and experience to best support children
with stammering, speech, and language needs.
Working together
Working together is facilitated by respect and valuing the time and experience of others.
For example, where good partnership working exists, early years settings provide a
welcoming space for specialists working into their settings. This includes letting the SLT
know if a child is absent, to more strategic decisions such as making time for planning
and discussion with early years settings staff. Working together to develop partnership
within the early years settings can be an opportunity early years settings staff and visiting
SLTs to build relationships to foster trust and respect. Ways of engaging and supporting
parents/caregivers, when considered at an early stage of the partnership can ensure they
feel welcome and valued. This should include appropriately skilled interpreters to allow
communication in the parent's/caregiver's home language.
Efficient use of resources
Monitoring children's response to universal, targeted and specialist interventions will
ensure they receive the most appropriate level of support at the right time. Some children
with speech and language needs will move between the universal and targeted
interventions either because the universal intervention is not providing enough support
for the child to progress or because the targeted intervention has helped them reach their
targets. Some children with speech and language needs will consistently need support
from a speech and language therapy service at the specialist level. Most children referred
to speech and language therapy services are likely to still need the support provided by
universal and targeted interventions delivered by the early years settings. Where aims of
the specialist intervention can be supported or achieved within the early years settings,
the speech and language therapy service can delegate these to appropriately trained and
experienced early years settings' staff. Alongside this delegation there will be monitoring
by the speech and language therapy service to introduce new goals and upskill early
years settings staff if necessary. Children with typically developing speech and language
can still benefit from the universal support in the early years settings.
Referring to specialist services
Timely and appropriate referral to speech and language therapy ensures best use of
resources across all organisations. All early years settings in the case studies know the
referral route into specialist services, particularly speech and language therapy, so that
early and timely assessment and intervention can be put in place. The speech and
language therapy services have clear guidelines as to how and when to refer children for
support and where necessary, provide tutorials to early years settings about the referral
process.
124
In early years settings where universal and targeted interventions are successfully
implemented, the nature of referrals to speech and language therapy services tends to
change. A combination of effective universal and targeted input, along with decision-
making shared with parents/caregivers and SLTs prior to referral, leads to fewer children
referred with mild-moderate forms of speech and language needs. These components
also lead to more timely referrals of children with moderate-severe speech and language
needs. This benefits both groups of children as they access the appropriate level of
support at the time they will most benefit from it. Some referred children may respond
more quickly to specialist interventions. This is because skills such as attention, listening
and phonological awareness have been acquired in targeted interventions.
Setting boundaries
One contributor to sustained successful working together is a clear agreement on the
amount of support provided to the early years settings by the SLT or other specialist, and
what that entails. If necessary and possible, a Service Level Agreement (SLA) should be
put in place to guarantee specialist presence. In addition, the early years settings should
be aware of their scope of practice and not overstep into areas where specialists should
be doing the assessment or intervention.
Resources
The early years settings in the case studies ensure that adequate resources are available
to deliver the desired intervention for the child. This includes having some ring-fenced
time to discuss and plan with the class teacher and others involved with the child. This
proves to be an area where support from senior leaders is essential. Environmental
constraints may impact the success of targeted intervention if suitable accommodation is
not available. For example, consideration should be given as to whether the intervention
takes place in the classroom or in a quiet room.
Motivation: Confidence and belief
Both in the literature review and case studies, partnership working is shown to increase
the early years setting staff's confidence in their knowledge, skills, and belief that what
they are doing will make a positive difference to the children's speech and language. In
some cases, this has been a contributing factor to low staff turnover. In all case studies,
the early years setting staff were confident in their ability to deliver interventions to a high
level of fidelity. Motivation to support children with stammering and/or speech and
language needs is also related to observations of the positive impact on the children's
progress, confirmed by objective and detailed record keeping.
125
Appendix A. Glossary
Term
Definition
Bilingual
A child who is learning more than one language. This could
occur sequentially where a child exclusively hears home
language at home and is only exposed to English when they
enter an early years setting, or simultaneously if they are
exposed to more than one language at home.
Broader report
Assessment is based on report of broad non-categorical
factors, such as background, home environment, language
exposure.
Checklist
An assessment tool where the presence or absence of a skill
or behaviour is indicated.
Collaboration
When two or more people with different skills and knowledge
work effectively with each other to complete the same piece of
work or to achieve the same goal. The work evolves as each
person contributes. The arrangement can be informal, and
collaborators may change during the work as they start or
finish their contribution. Collaborators may not have equal
status in the relationship and may not bear the same
responsibility for completing the work or achieving the goal.
Communication
Broadly, this means the process of sharing meaning between
people using any and all available means, including words,
sounds, signs, gestures, and facial expressions. More narrowly
and often, in the context of Speech, Language and
Communication Needs, communication can refer to the more
nonverbal aspects of communication, such as turn-taking,
gesture (e.g., pointing), eye contact, and proximity and/or
'pragmatic' aspects of communication such as taking listener
knowledge into account, ability to infer non-literal meaning.
Concurrent validity
The degree to which a measure aligns with another well-
established measure which is often a standardised "gold
standard" test.
Construct validity
The theoretical basis of the measure and ability to differentiate
between groups with known differences in ability, e.g. with age.
Does the test measure the concept it is intended to measure.
Correlation
A statistical test measuring the degree to which two sets of
scores are related to one another such that if one increases
then the other also increases or vice versa.
126
Term
Definition
Cronbach's alpha
A statistical test measuring agreement between scores.
Cross-cultural validity
The degree to which a measure is applicable across cultures
and/or has been adapted for use in other languages.
Discriminant validity
Verifies that measures or components of measures that should
not be related are not related.
DfE
Department for Education
Early years setting
Any provision which offers early education and care for
children aged between 0-5 years.
Face validity
A qualitative, subjective judgement by those who use the tool
as to whether it measures what it aims to measure.
Forced choice or
The adult provides the child with a choice of two responses
Forced alternative
(e.g. one correct and one incorrect).
Global measure
A measure of multiple domains of SLC without specifying or
providing scores for separate domains but rather a global
rating of SLC abilities.
Grey literature
Literature such as reports published by charities or
governments, resource manuals, doctoral theses, and pre-
prints of research may not have been peer-reviewed but are
likely to contain useful and up-to-date information.
Identification of need
A measure which is designed to support the identification of
needs by categorising children into those above or below a
given threshold.
Internal consistency
Assesses how well the different items within the measurement
tool measure the same underlying construct.
Inter-rater reliability
Assesses the degree to which two different users of the
measure /raters of the child's performance agree with one
another.
Intra-class correlation
A statistical test can measure inter-rater reliability and test-
retest reliability.
Language
The understanding and use of words, sentences, and
grammatical markers (e.g. -ing; -ed) to share meaning.
Language difficulty
Language development, which is not reaching age-related
expectations, but it is not yet clear if this is a persisting
difficulty.
127
Term
Definition
Language disorder
Language difficulties which persist, are unlikely to resolve
without specialist help and which significantly affect the child's
everyday social interactions and educational progress.
Learning support
An early years professional who helps children in a setting who
assistant
need extra support and works with teachers to create positive
learning environments for all children.
Normative sample
The sample of children used to develop the norms for a given
measure. That is to generate the average range of scores for a
given tool and/or the age when a certain behaviour or skill
would be expected to have developed.
Observation
Assessment is based on physical observation of the child's
behaviour, ability, or skill.
Parallel working
When different professionals work separately with the same
child/children, each contributing their specialist knowledge.
Each professional bears responsibility individually to achieve
their goals, which may have been set with no consultation with
other professionals. Parents/caregivers may be more involved
with each professional in this model. Information about
progress is reported from the professional to the educational
setting, other involved professionals, and parent/caregiver.
There may or may not be a two-way flow of information.
Partnership
A more formal arrangement than a collaboration. There is a
high level of commitment and an expectation that the
partnership will be long lasting. Partners share risk and
responsibility and contribute similar levels of expertise and
resource. Partnerships may facilitate several different
collaborations and have several projects or pieces of work at
the same time.
Peer review
Articles in academic journals are reviewed by at least two
experts in the same field (peers) before it is published. The
article is revised by the author(s) in response to the reviewers'
comments before publication.
Phonological
The conscious awareness of, and ability to play with the
awareness
sounds of spoken language. This includes (but is not limited to)
recognising word and syllable boundaries, recognising, and
generating rhyme, and identifying and manipulating individual
sounds in words.
128
Term
Definition
Profiling strengths
A measure which summarises a child's abilities across a
and weaknesses
number of SLC domains enabling a profile to be described and
areas of potential need for intervention identified.
RAG (red, amber,
RAG rating is used to record if a child's performance on a task
green) rating
or assessment is acceptable (green), at risk (amber) or below
the desired performance (red). There are usually agreed cut
points between each level.
Rapid review
A systematic analysis of literature to answer specific questions
about a topic. Design decisions and practical steps are
undertaken to reduce the time it takes to identify the literature,
extract information, analyse and synthesise the data to answer
the questions.
Rating scale
Ability is rated on a numerical or categorical scale that
describes varying degrees of competence.
Reliability
The consistency and precision of the measure. This can
include consideration of consistency over time, between
different people using the measure and across items within the
measure. Lack of reliability introduced error into the
measurement process reducing the confidence we can have
that it is providing a true representation of the child's abilities.
SLCN
Speech, Language and Communication Needs. An umbrella
category of special needs encompassing difficulties with
understanding and using, sounds, words, and/or sentences;
forming clear speech; interacting with others; speaking fluently.
Sensitivity
The proportion of people with a given condition that have a
positive result on a screening test. A test that is 100% sensitive
means all individuals with a given condition are correctly
identified i.e. there are no false negatives (i.e. people who
have the condition but are not identified by the test).
Specialist
Approaches used for children with identified needs requiring
individualised programs of support delivered and/or overseen
by SLT.
Specificity
The proportion of people without a given condition that have a
negative result on a screening test. A test that is 100% specific
means all individuals who do not have a given condition are
correctly identified i.e. there are no false positives. As
specificity increases, sensitivity decreases.
129
Term
Definition
Speech
'Speech' refers to the production and use of speech sounds
including consonants (e.g., p, b, m, s) and vowels (e.g., ah, ee,
00) to form words that convey a message in a given language.
Each language has its own set of speech sounds.
Speech sound
SSD is an umbrella or overarching term for a difficulty
disorder (SSD)
producing or using the sounds of speech in a child's home
language(s), which results in reduced intelligibility compared to
other children of the same age. There are several different
types of difficulty that are labelled as Speech Sound Disorder.
Stammering
Stammering (also known as stuttering) is characterised by
whole and part-word repetitions, prolongations and 'blocking' of
sounds and may be accompanied by physical tension,
additional movements, and/or avoidance of words or speaking.
Targeted
Approaches used to support children at risk of S&LN, and/or
not meeting age-related expectations in speech and/or
language but not meeting criteria for SLT referral and/or where
SLT agree the Targeted offer is appropriate to meet the child's
current needs and/or constitutes a period of dynamic
assessment. Support for the child can be focussed directly on
their area of need (e.g. vocabulary, grammar) and/or on
increasing their communicative and/or educational participation
in the setting.
Test-retest reliability
Assess how stable a child's performance is on the measure. If
a measure is repeated to what degree are the scores
consistent from one use of the test to the next.
TIDieR framework
The Template for Intervention Description and Replication
(TIDieR) is a checklist and guideline developed to help to
improve completeness in the reporting of interventions in
research studies. It defines key aspects of an intervention
which should be described, for example who it is for, what
materials are used, how it is delivered.
Tracking progress
A measure which can be used at more than one time-point to
enable the tracking of a child's progress over time.
Universal
Approaches used across a whole setting which promote robust
speech, language, and communication development for all
children.
130
Term
Definition
Usability
A qualitative judgement regarding how feasible, practical, and
easy a tool is for practitioners to use.
Validity
The degree to which an assessment tool measures the
construct it is designed to be measured. There are multiple
types of validity.
131
Appendix B. Evidence Appraisal Tables
Table B. 1. Evidence appraisal for Phonological Awareness intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
Not met
Initial group similarity
Unclear
Fidelity reported
Unclear
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Unclear
Blinding of assessors
Unclear
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Unclear
Table B. 2. Evidence appraisal for Speech Recasts intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
Met
Initial group similarity
Met
Fidelity reported
Met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Met
Blinding of assessors
Met
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
132
Table B. 3. Evidence appraisal for Developing Talkers intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
Unclear
Initial group similarity
Unclear
Fidelity reported
Met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Met
Blinding of assessors
Met
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
Table B. 4. Evidence appraisal for NELI preschool intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
Met
Initial group similarity
Met
Fidelity reported
Not met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Not met
Blinding of assessors
Met
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
133
Table B. 5. Evidence appraisal for Dialogic Reading for Mathematical Language
intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
Not met
Initial group similarity
Met
Fidelity reported
Met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Met
Blinding of assessors
Met
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
Table B. 6. Evidence appraisal for Explicit Vocabulary Instruction intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
Not met
Initial group similarity
Not met
Fidelity reported
Not met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Not met
Blinding of assessors
Not met
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
134
Table B. 7. Evidence appraisal for Play and Language intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
N/A
Initial group similarity
Not met
Fidelity reported
Not met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Not met
Blinding of assessors
Not met
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Not met
Effect size(s) reported
Not met
Table B. 8. Evidence appraisal for Shared Book Reading with Gameplay
intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
N/A
Initial group similarity
Unclear
Fidelity reported
Met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Met
Blinding of assessors
Unclear
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Not met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
135
Table B. 9. Evidence appraisal for Bridge Made of Stories intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
Not met
Initial group similarity
Met
Fidelity reported
Met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Met
Blinding of assessors
Not met
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
Table B. 10. Evidence appraisal for Early Talk Boost intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
Not met
Initial group similarity
Not met
Fidelity reported
Not met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Not met
Blinding of assessors
Met
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Not met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
136
Table B. 11. Evidence appraisal for Educator-Implemented Storybook Vocabulary
intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
Met
Initial group similarity
Met
Fidelity reported
Not met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Not met
Blinding of assessors
Met
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
Table B. 12. Evidence appraisal for Happy Talk intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
N/A
Initial group similarity
Met
Fidelity reported
Met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Met
Blinding of assessors
Met
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
137
Table B. 13. Evidence appraisal for Literate Language intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
Not met
Initial group similarity
Not met
Fidelity reported
Not met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Not met
Blinding of assessors
Met
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
Table B. 14. Evidence appraisal for Nuffield Early Language intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
Met
Initial group similarity
Met
Fidelity reported
Met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Unclear
Blinding of assessors
Met
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
138
Table B. 15. Evidence appraisal for Preparing Pequeños intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
Met
Initial group similarity
Unclear
Fidelity reported
Met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Not met
Blinding of assessors
Unclear
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
Table B. 16. Evidence appraisal for Read Aloud intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
Not met
Initial group similarity
Not met
Fidelity reported
Met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Not met
Blinding of assessors
Unclear
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
139
Table B. 17. Evidence appraisal for Story Friends intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
Not met
Initial group similarity
Met
Fidelity reported
Met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Met
Blinding of assessors
Met
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
Table B. 18. Evidence appraisal for Talk Boost intervention
Appraisal criteria
Quality (Met/Not met/Unclear)
Randomisation procedure clear
Met
Initial group similarity
Met
Fidelity reported
Not met
Fidelity acceptable (above 80%)
Not met
Blinding of assessors
Met
Intervention description sufficient for replication
Met
Measures valid and reliable
Met
p values reported for all outcomes
Met
Effect size(s) reported
Met
140
Appendix C. Effect Size Tables
Table C. 1. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Phonological Awareness
intervention
Study
Highest effect
Highest
Lowest
Lowest
No
effect size
effect
effect size
effect
(Hedges' g)
(Hedges' g)
Denne, 2005
Phonological
0.87
N/A
N/A
N/A
awareness
(composite)
Gillion, 2005
Phonological
0.51
Phonological
0.08
N/A
awareness
awareness
(phoneme
(phoneme
matching)
awareness)
Table C. 2. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Developing Talkers
intervention
Study
Highest
Highest
Lowest
Lowest
No effect
effect
effect size
effect
effect size
(Hedges'
(Hedges'
g)
g)
Zucker,
Taught
0.84
Exposure
0.43
Vocabulary
2019
receptive
vocabulary
naming;
vocabulary
Listening
comprehension
Zucker,
Taught
0.43
N/A
N/A
Vocabulary
2013
receptive
fluency;
vocabulary
Expressive
vocabulary;
Listening
comprehension
141
Table C. 3. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for NELI Preschool intervention
Study
Highest
Highest
Lowest
Lowest
No effect
effect
effect size
effect
effect size
(Hedges' g)
(Hedges' g)
West, 2024
Oral
0.51
Grammar
0.01
N/A
language
(universal)
(universal)
Table C. 4. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Dialogic Reading for
Mathematical Language intervention
Study
Highest
Highest
Lowest
Lowest
No effect
effect
effect size
effect
effect size
(Hedges' g)
(Hedges' g)
Purpura,
Receptive
0.42
N/A
N/A
Expressive
2017
vocabulary
vocabulary
Table C. 5. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Explicit Vocabulary
Instruction intervention
Study
Highest
Highest
Lowest
Lowest
No effect
effect
effect size
effect
effect size
(Hedges' g)
(Hedges' g)
Damhuis,
Vocabulary
1.58
Vocabulary
1.07
Receptive
2014
(breadth)
(depth)
vocabulary
142
Table C. 6. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Shared Book reading with
Gameplay intervention
Study
Highest
Highest
Lowest
Lowest
No effect
effect
effect size
effect
effect size
(Hedges' g)
(Hedges' g)
Hassinger-
Taught
1.49
Taught
1.30
Expressive
das, 2016
expressive
receptive
language
vocabulary
vocabulary
(categories
e.g. nouns,
functions,
gestures)
Table C. 7. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Bridge Made of Stories
intervention
Study
Highest
Highest
Lowest
Lowest
No effect
effect
effect size
effect
effect size
(Hedges' g)
(Hedges' g)
Spencer,
Taught
0.93
Taught
0.46
Expressive
2020
receptive
receptive
vocabulary;
vocabulary
vocabulary
word
(English)
(Spanish)
structure
Table C. 8. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Early Talk Boost
intervention
Study
Highest
Highest
Lowest
Lowest
No effect
effect
effect size
effect
effect size
(Hedges' g)
(Hedges' g)
Reeves,
Receptive
0.06
Expressive
0.04
N/A
2018
language
language
143
Table C. 9. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Educator-Implemented
Storybook Vocabulary intervention
Study
Highest
Highest
Lowest
Lowest
No effect
effect
effect size
effect
effect size
(Hedges' g)
(Hedges' g)
Vuattoux,
Composite
1.53
N/A
N/A
N/A
2014
expressive
and
receptive
vocabulary
Table C. 10. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Happy Talk intervention
Study
Highest effect
Highest
Lowest
Lowest
No effect
effect size
effect
effect size
(Hedges'
(Hedges'
g)
g)
Frizelle,
Auditory
0.45
Composite
0.44
Expressive
2021
comprehension
language
language
(receptive)
(expressive
and
receptive)
Table C. 11. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Literate Language
intervention
Study
Highest
Highest
Lowest effect
Lowest
No effect
effect
effect size
effect size
(Hedges'
(Hedges'
g)
g)
Phillips,
Composite
0.88
Listening
0.31
Expressive
2016
language
comprehension
grammar;
expressive
vocabulary
144
Table C. 12. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Nuffield Early Language
intervention
Study
Highest effect
Highest
Lowest effect
Lowest
No effect
effect size
effect size
(Hedges'
(Hedges'
g)
g)
Fricke,
Grammar
0.69
Oral language
0.09
N/A
2013
(narrative)
Fricke,
Taught
1.12
Grammar (30-
0.08
N/A
2017
expressive
week
vocabulary
intervention)
(30-week
intervention)
West,
Listening
0.28
Grammar
0.08
N/A
2024
comprehension
Table C. 13. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Preparing Pequeños
intervention
Study
Highest
Highest
Lowest effect
Lowest
No effect
effect
effect size
effect size
(Hedges'
(Hedges'
g)
g)
Landry,
Phonological
0.30
Grammar
0.10
Print
2019
awareness
(basic
awareness
(separating
concepts)
(Spanish);
sounds
grammar
(basic
concepts in
English)
145
Table C. 14. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Read Aloud intervention
Study
Highest
Highest
Lowest effect
Lowest
No effect
effect
effect size
effect size
(Hedges'
(Hedges'
g)
g)
Silverman,
Receptive
0.68
Receptive
0.44
Receptive
2013
vocabulary
vocabulary
vocabulary
(Read Aloud
(Read Aloud
(standardised
Plus)
only)
assessment)
Table C. 15. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Story Friends intervention
Study
Highest
Highest
Lowest
Lowest
No effect
effect
effect size
effect
effect size
(Hedges'
(Hedges'
g)
g)
Kelley,
Taught
2.62
N/A
N/A
Language
2015
receptive
comprehension
vocabulary
Kelley,
Unable to
N/A
Unable to
N/A
Receptive
2020
calculate
calculate
vocabulary
(standardised
assessment
not reported)
146
Table C. 16. Calculated effect sizes using Hedges' g for Talk Boost intervention
Study
Language
Highest
Highest
Lowest
Lowest
No effect
status of
effect
effect
effect
effect
sample
size
size
(Hedges'
(Hedges'
g)
g)
Lee,
English as
Narrative
0.79
Expressive
0.02
N/A
2016
an
(Year 1)
grammar
Additional
Language
Lee,
Monolingual
Narrative
0.58
Narrative
0.04
N/A
2016
English
(Reception)
(Year 1);
Grammar
(All
children)
147
References
ACTION FOR CHILDREN 2021. Closed doors: Children's centre usage between 2014/15
and 2017/18. Watford.
ALCOCK, K., MEINTS, K. & ROWLAND, C. 2020. The UK Communicative Development
Inventories: Words and Gestures, J&R Press.
ALLEN, M. M. 2013. Intervention efficacy and intensity for children with speech sound
disorder. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 56, 865-877.
ANTHONY, J. L. & FRANCIS, D. J. 2005. Development of Phonological Awareness.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 14, 255-259.
BAKER, E. & MCLEOD, S. 2004. Evidence-based management of phonological
impairment in children. Child Language Teaching and Therapy, 20, 261-285.
BARBOUR, L. 2022. CECIL: Coaching early conversations, interaction and language
BEILINSON, J. S. & OLSWANG, L. B. 2003. Facilitating peer-group entry in
kindergartners with impairments in social communication. Language Speech and
Hearing Services in Schools, 34, 154-166.
BELLMAN, M., LINGHAM, S. & AUKETT, A. 1996. Schedule of Growing Skills II
Reference Manual London, GL Assessment.
BELLON-HARN, M. L., HOFFMAN, P. R. & HARN, W.E. 2004. Use of cloze and
contrast word procedures in repeated storybook reading: targeting multiple
domains. Journal of Communication Disorders, 53 - 75.
BERQUEZ, A. E., COOK, F. M., MILLARD, S. K. & JARVIS, E. 2011. The Stammering
Information Programme: a Delphi study. J Fluency Disord, 36, 206-21.
BISHOP, D. V. & MCDONALD, D. 2009. Identifying language impairment in children:
combining language test scores with parental report. International Journal of
Language & Communication Disorders, 44, 600-615.
BISHOP, D. V.M., SNOWLING, M. J., THOMPSON, P. A., GREENHALGH, T., ADAMS,
C., ARCHIBALD, L.,
WHITEHOUSE, A. 2016. CATALISE: A multinational and
multidisciplinary Delphi consensus study. Identifying language impairments in
children. PLoS ONE, 11.
BISHOP, D. V. M., SNOWLING, M. J., THOMPSON, P.A., GREENHALGH, T., AND
THE, C.-C., ADAMS, C., WHITEHOUSE, A. 2017. Phase 2 of CATALISE:
a
multinational and multidisciplinary Delphi consensus study of problems with
148
language development: Terminology. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry
and Allied Disciplines, 58, 1068-1080.
BORNSTEIN, M. H., HAHN, C. S. & PUTNICK, D. L. 2016. Long-term stability of core
language skill in children with contrasting language skills. Developmental
Psychology, 52, 704-716.
BRIGNELL, A., WILLIAMS, K., PRIOR, M., DONATH, S., REILLY, S., BAVIN, E. L.,
MORGAN, A. T. 2016. Parent-reported patterns of loss and gain in communication
in 1- to 2-year-old children are not unique to autism spectrum disorder. Autism, 21,
344-356.
BRILEY, P. M., GERLACH, H. & JACOBS, M. M. 2021. Relationships between stuttering,
depression, and suicidal ideation in young adults: Accounting for gender
differences. J Fluency Disord, 67, 105820.
BROOMFIELD, J. & DODD, B. 2004. Children with speech and language disability:
Caseload characteristics. International Journal of Language and Communication
Disorders, 39, 303-324.
BRUMBAUGH, K. M. & SMIT, A. B. 2013. Treating children ages 3-6 who have speech
sound disorder: a survey. Lang Speech Hear Serv Sch, 44, 306-19.
BRUNDAGE, S. B., RATNER, N. B., BOYLE, M. P., EGGERS, K., EVERARD, R.,
FRANKEN, M. C. YARUSS, J.S. 2021. Consensus Guidelines for the
Assessments of Individuals Who Stutter Across the Lifespan. Am J Speech Lang
Pathol, 30, 2379-2393.
CANE, J., O'CONNOR, D. & MICHIE, S. 2012. Validation of the theoretical domains
framework for use in behaviour change and implementation research.
Implementation Science, 7.
CAPPELLERI, J. C., JASON LUNDY, J. & HAYS, R. D. 2014. Overview of classical test
theory and item response theory for the quantitative assessment of items in
developing patient-reported outcomes measures. Clin Ther, 36, 648-62.
CARAVOLAS, M. & BRUCK, M. 1993. The effect of oral and written language input on
children's phonological awareness: A cross-linguistic study. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 55, 1-30.
CHOO, A. L., SMITH, S. A. & LI, H. 2020. Associations between stuttering, comorbid
conditions and executive function in children: a population-based study. BMC
Psychol, 8, 113.
149
CLARK, C. E., TUMANOVA, V. & CHOI, D. 2017. Evidence-Based Multifactorial
Assessment of Preschool-Age Children Who Stutter. Perspectives of the ASHA
Special Interest Groups, 2, 4-27.
COMBITHS, P. N., BARLOW, J. A., RICHARD, J. T. & PRUITT-LORD, S. L. 2019.
Treatment Targets for Co-Occurring Speech-Language Impairment: A Case Study.
Perspect ASHA Spec Interest Groups, 4, 240-256.
CONNER, J., KELLY-VANCE, L., RYALLS, B. O. & FRIEHE, M. J. 2014. A Play and
Language Intervention for Two-Year-Old Children: Implications for Improving Play
Skills and Language Journal of Research in Childhood Education, 28, 221 - 237.
COZART, G. & WILSON, L. 2022. Strategies for Teachers to Support Children Who
Stutter: Perspectives of Speech-Language Pathologists. Perspectives of the ASHA
Special Interest Groups, 7, 73-86.
CROSBIE, S., HOLM, A. & DODD, B. 2005. Intervention for children with severe speech
disorder: a comparison of two approaches. Int J Lang Commun Disord, 40, 467-91.
DAMHUIS, C. M., SEGERS, E. & VERHOEVEN, L. 2014. Sustainability of Breadth and
Depth of Vocabulary after Implicit versus Explicit Instruction in Kindergarten.
International Journal of Disability, Development and Education, 61, 194 - 211.
DAWES, E., LEITÃO, S., CLAESSEN, M. & KANE, R. 2019. A randomized controlled
trial of an oral inferential comprehension intervention for young children with
developmental language disorder. Child Language Teaching and Therapy, 35, 39-
54.
DCSF 2008. Every child a talker: Guidance for early language lead practitioners,
Nottingham, DCSF.
DE SONNEVILLE-KOEDOOT, C., STOLK, E., RIETVELD, T. & FRANKEN, M.-C. 2015.
Direct versus Indirect Treatment for Preschool Children who Stutter: The RESTART
Randomized Trial. PLOS ONE, 10, e0133758.
DENNE, M. K., LANGDOWN, T. & ROY, P. 2005. Treating children with expressive
phonological disorders: does phonological awareness therapy work in the clinic?
International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders, 40 (4): 493-504.
Journal of Language and Communication Disorders, 40, 493 - 504.
DOBINSON, K. L. & DOCKRELL, J. E. 2021. Universal strategies for the improvement of
expressive language skills in the primary classroom: A systematic review. First
Language, 41, 527-554.
150
DOCKRELL, J., LAW, J., MATHERS, S., FORREST, C., CHARLTON, J., DOBINSON, K.
& HEWIT, L. 2023. Empowering staff to enhance oral language in the early years:
Cluster randomised trial: Final report
DOCKRELL, J. E., BAKOPOULOU, I., LAW, J., SPENCER, S. & LINDSAY, G. 2012.
Developing a communication supporting classroom observation tool. In:
DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION (ed.). London: DfE.
DODD, B., CROSBIE, S., MCINTOSH, B., HOLM, A., HARVEY, C., LIDDY, M.
RIGBY, H. 2008. The impact of selecting different contrasts in phonological therapy.
Int J Speech Lang Pathol, 10, 334-45.
DODD, B., CROSBIE, S., MCINTOSH, B., TEITZEL, T. & OZANNE, A. 2000. Pre-school
and primary inventory of phonological awareness (PIPA), Psychological
Corporation.
DODD, B., HOLM, A., HUA, Z. & CROSBIE, S. 2003. Phonological development: a
normative study of British English-speaking children. Clin Linguist Phon, 17, 617-43.
DONALD, L., LODDER, A., ROGERS, C., CASH, S., PAPPIS, Y. & RANDHAWA, G.
2022. "Talking Takes Off": A System-wide Approach to Prioritize Children's Speech,
Language, and Communication Needs. Prog Community Health Partnersh, 16, 463-
471.
DUBOIS, P., ST-PIERRE, M. C., DESMARAIS, C. & GUAY, F. 2020. Young adults with
developmental language disorder: A systematic review of education, employment,
and independent living outcomes. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 63, 3786-3800.
DUGGAN, C., IRVINE, A. D., J, O. B. H., KIELY, M. E. & MURRAY, D. M. 2023. ASQ-3
and BSID-III's concurrent validity and predictive ability of cognitive outcome at 5
years. Pediatr Res, 94, 1465-1471.
DUNN, L. M., DUNN, D. M., STYLES, B. & SEWELL, J. 2009. British Picture Vocabulary
Scales III, NFER-Nelson.
DYSART, E. & CODE, A. 2023. Use of the Wellcomm Toolkit in Early Talk for York
(ETFY) Settings: Evaluation Report, York, University of York.
EADIE, P., CONWAY, L., HALLENSTEIN, B., MENSAH, F., MCKEAN, C. & REILLY, S.
2018. Quality of Life in children with Developmental Language Disorder.
International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 53, 799-810.
EADIE, P., LEVICKIS, P., MCKEAN, C., WESTRUPP, E., BAVIN, E. L., WARE, R. S
REILLY, S. 2022. Developing Preschool Language Surveillance Models -
151
Cumulative and Clustering Patterns of Early Life Factors in the Early Language in
Victoria Study Cohort. Frontiers in Pediatrics, 10.
EADIE, P., MORGAN, A., UKOUMUNNE, O. C., TTOFARI EECEN, K., WAKE, M. &
REILLY, S. 2015. Speech sound disorder at 4 years: prevalence, comorbidities, and
predictors in a community cohort of children. Developmental Medicine & Child
Neurology, 57, 578-584.
EARLY YEARS ALLIANCE 2021. Breaking point: The impact of recruitment and retention
challenges on the early years sector in England.
EEF 2024. A School's Guide to Implementation.
EIF. 2020. Closing the gap on speech, language and communication in the early years:
local case studies [Online]. Early Intervention Foundation. Available:
https://www.eif.org.uk/resource/closing-the-gap-on-speech-language-and-
communication-in-the-early-years-local-case-studies [Accessed February 2024].
EINARSDÓTTIR, J. & INGHAM, R. 2009. Accuracy of parent identification of stuttering
occurrence. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 44,
847-863.
EINARSDÓTTIR, J. & INGHAM, R. J. 2008. The effect of stuttering measurement
training on judging stuttering occurrence in preschool children who stutter. Journal
of Fluency Disorders, 33, 167-179.
ERBAY, F. & TARMAN, I. 2022. Effect of the Covid-19 pandemic on language
development of preschool children. Issues in Educational Research, 32, 1364-1383.
FARQUHARSON, K. 2015. Language or motor: reviewing categorical etiologies of
speech sound disorders. Front Psychol, 6, 1708.
FERNALD, A., MARCHMAN, V.A. & WEISLEDER, A. 2013. SES differences in
language processing skill and vocabulary are evident at 18 months. Developmental
Science, 16, 234-248.
FEY, M. E. 1986. Language intervention with young children, San Diego CA, College Hill
Press.
FEY, M. E., LEONARD, L. B., BREDIN-OJA, S. L. & DEEVY, P. 2017. A Clinical
Evaluation of the Competing Sources of Input Hypothesis. J Speech Lang Hear
Res, 60, 104-120.
152
FEY, M. E., YODER, P. J., WARREN, S. F. & BREDIN-OJA, S. L. 2013. Is more better?
Milieu communication teaching in toddlers with intellectual disabilities. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 56, 679-693.
FLINT, C. B. & INGHAM, J. C. 2005. Pretreatment stimulability and percentage of
consonants correct as predictors of across-phoneme generalization. Contemporary
Issues in Communication Science and Disorders, 32, 53-63.
FRICKE, S., BOWYER-CRANE, C., HALEY, A. J., HULME, C. & SNOWLING, M. J.
2013a. Efficacy of language intervention in the early years. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 54, 280-290.
FRICKE, S., BOWYER-CRANE, C., HALEY, A. J., HULME, C. & SNOWLING, M. J.
2013b. Efficacy of language intervention in the early years. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 54, 280-290.
FRIZELLE, P., MULLANE, E., O'SHEA, A., CERONI, A., DAHLY, D., HORGAN, A.
MCKEAN, C. 2021. Happy Talk: A pilot effectiveness study of a Targeted-selective
speech-language and communication intervention for children from areas of social
disadvantage. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 56,
954-974.
FURLONG, L. M., MORRIS, M. E., SERRY, T. A. & ERICKSON, S. 2021. Treating
Childhood Speech Sound Disorders: Current Approaches to Management by
Australian Speech-Language Pathologists. Lang Speech Hear Serv Sch, 52, 581-
596.
GASCOIGNE, M. 2006. Supporting children with speech, language and communication
needs within integrated children's services. London: RCSLT.
GASCOIGNE, M. 2021. Equity for all: Children's speech and language therapy services
in Scotland. Better Communication CIC & Scottish Government.
GASCOIGNE, M. 2023. Better Communication CIC: The balanced system. [Online].
Available: https://www.bettercommunication.org.uk/the-balanced-system/ [Accessed
12/03/2023].
GIBBARD, D. & SMITH, C. 2016. A transagency approach to enabling access to parent-
based intervention for language delay in areas of social disadvantage: A service
evaluation. Child Language Teaching and Therapy, 32, 19-33.
GILLON, G. 2005. Facilitating phoneme awareness in 3-4 year old children with speech
impairment. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 36, 308-324.
153
GILLON, G. T. 2006. Phonological awareness intervention: a preventative framework for
pre-school children with Language Impairments. In: MCCAULEY, R. J. & FEY, M. E.
(eds.) Treatment of language disorders in children. Baltimore, Maryland: Paul H
Brooks Publishing Company.
GILLON, G. T. 2008. The Gillon Phonological Awareness Training Programme: An
Intervention Programme for Children at Risk of Reading Disorder., College of
Education, University of Canterbury, New Zealand.
GILLON, G. T. & MCNEIL, B. C. 2007. Integrated Phonological Awareness: An
Intervention Programme for Preschool Children with Speech-Language
Impairment., College of Education, University of Canterbury, New Zealand.
GIROLAMETTO, L., WEITZMAN, E. & GREENBERG, J. 2003. Training day care staff to
facilitate children's language. Am J Speech Lang Pathol, 12, 299-311.
GORDON-BRANNAN, M. & HODSON, B. W. 2000. Intelligibility/Severity Measurements
of Prekindergarten Children's Speech. American Journal of Speech-Language
Pathology, 9, 141-150.
GRAUBERG, J. 2024. CECIL: Final Report Coaching early conversations, interaction
and language
HAMBLY, H., WREN, Y., MCLEOD, S. & ROULSTONE, S. 2013. The influence of
bilingualism on speech production: a systematic review. Int J Lang Commun Disord,
48, 1-24.
HAMILTON, A., PLUNKETT, K. & SCHAFER, G. 2000. Infant vocabulary development
assessed with a British communicative development inventory. J Child Lang, 27,
689-705.
HARMEY, S., ANG, L. & GRENIER, J. 2022. A participatory approach to embedding
evidence in practice to support early language and communication in a London
nursery school. London Review of Education 20.
HARRIS, F., LAW, J. & ROY, P. 2004. The development of a 50 word adaptation of the
UK short form of the MCDI for use with two years olds in Sure Start Programmes in
England.
HART, S. & GONZALEZ, L. 2010. The Effectiveness of Using Communication-Centered
Intervention to Facilitate Phonological Learning in Young Children. Communication
Disorders Quarterly, 32, 13-25.
154
HASSINGER-DAS, B., RIDGE, K., PARKER, A., GOLINKOFF, R. M., HIRSH-PASEK, K.
& DICKINSON, D. K. 2016. Building vocabulary knowledge in preschoolers through
shared book reading and gameplay. Mind, Brain, and Education, 10, 71-80.
HAYIOU-THOMAS, M. E., CARROLL, J. M., LEAVETT, R., HULME, C. & SNOWLING,
M. J. 2017. When does speech sound disorder matter for literacy? The role of
disordered speech errors, co-occurring language impairment and family risk of
dyslexia. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 58, 197-205.
HEARNE, A., MILES, A., CLARKE, E., BRASELL, S., DIVERS, E., TONG, A. &
WIELENGA, S. Developing a stakeholder led stuttering resource for teachers in
New Zealand. Speech, Language and Hearing, 1-13.
HEARNE, A., MILES, A., DOUGLAS, J., CARR, B., NICHOLLS, J. R., BULLOCK, M. S.,
SOUTHWOOD, H. 2021. Exploring teachers' attitudes: knowledge and classroom
strategies for children who stutter in New Zealand. Speech, Language and Hearing,
24, 28-37.
HEARNSHAW, S., BAKER, E. & MUNRO, N. 2019. Speech Perception Skills of Children
with Speech Sound Disorders: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Speech
Lang Hear Res, 62, 3771-3789.
HEGARTY, N., TITTERINGTON, J., MCLEOD, S. & TAGGART, L. 2018. Intervention for
children with phonological impairment: Knowledge, practices and intervention
intensity in the UK. Int J Lang Commun Disord, 53, 995-1006.
HOFF, E. 2003. The Specificity of Environmental Influence: Socioeconomic Status
Affects Early Vocabulary Development Via Maternal Speech. Child Development,
74, 1368-1378.
HOGAN, T. P., CATTS, H. W. & LITTLE, T. D. 2005. The relationship between
phonological awareness and reading: implications for the assessment of
phonological awareness. Lang Speech Hear Serv Sch, 36, 285-93.
HOPE, K. 2020. The application and impact of a public health intervention supported by a
Speech and Language Therapist in the Early Years Foundation Stage., Newcastle
University.
HULME, C., MCGRANE, J., DUTA, M., WEST, G., CRIPPS, D., DASGUPTA, A
SNOWLING, M. 2024. LanguageScreen: The Development, Validation, and
Standardization of an Automated Language Assessment App. Language, Speech,
and Hearing Services in Schools.
155
HUSSAIN, F., MORRIS, S., BASI, T. & BRISTOW, T. 2020. 'Manor Park Talks: pilot
Report
HUSTAD, K. C., MAHR, T., NATZKE, P. E. M. & RATHOUZ, P. J. 2020. Development of
Speech Intelligibility Between 30 and 47 Months in Typically Developing Children: A
Cross-Sectional Study of Growth. J Speech Lang Hear Res, 63, 1675-1687.
JABRAYILOV, R., EMONS, W. H. M. & SIJTSMA, K. 2016. Comparison of Classical Test
Theory and Item Response Theory in Individual Change Assessment. Appl Psychol
Meas, 40, 559-572.
JAGO, L. S., ALCOCK, K., MEINTS, K., PINE, J. M. & ROWLAND, C. F. 2023. Language
outcomes from the UK-CDI Project: can risk factors, vocabulary skills and gesture
scores in infancy predict later language disorders or concern for language
development? Frontiers in Psychology, 14.
JOFFE, V. & PRING, T. 2008. Children with phonological problems: a survey of clinical
practice. Int J Lang Commun Disord, 43, 154-64.
JUSTICE, L. M. 2004. Creating Language-Rich Preschool Classroom Environments.
TEACHING Exceptional Children, 37, 36-44.
JUSTICE, L. M. & CABELL, S. Q. 2022. Educational Interventions Targeting Language
Development. In: MCKEAN, C., LAW, J. & REILLY, S. (eds.) Language
Development: Individual Differences in a Social Context. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
KARAASLAN, O., DIKEN, I. H. & MAHONEY, G. 2013. A Randomized Control Study of
Responsive Teaching with Young Turkish Children and Their Mothers. Topics in
Early Childhood Special Education, 33, 18-27.
KELLEY, E. S., BARKER, R. M., L.A., P.-S., MADSEN, K. M., SEVEN, Y., SOTO, X.,
GOLDSTEIN, H. 2020. Feasible Implementation Strategies for Improving
Vocabulary Knowledge of High-Risk Preschoolers: Results from a Cluster-
Randomized Trial. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 1-18.
KELLEY, E. S., GOLDSTEIN, H., SPENCER, T. D. & SHERMAN, A. 2015. Effects of
automated Tier 2 storybook intervention on vocabulary and comprehension learning
in preschool children with limited oral language skills. Early Childhood Research
Quarterly, 31, 47 - 61.
KENDALL, S., NASH, A., BRAUN, A., BASTUG, G., ROUGEAUX, E. & BEDFORD, H.
2019. Acceptability and understanding of the Ages & Stages Questionnaires(R),
Third Edition, as part of the Healthy Child Programme 2-year health and
156
development review in England: Parent and professional perspectives. Child Care
Health Dev, 45, 251-256.
KENT, J. & MCDONALD, S. 2019. Experiences of the implementation of an early years
communication improvement model: Speech and Language Therapist and Early
Years practitioner perspectives and implications for practice.
KENT, J. & MCDONALD, S. 2021. What are the experiences of speech and language
therapists implementing a staff development approach in early years settings to
enhance good communication practices? Child Language Teaching and Therapy,
37, 85-97.
LAGERBERG, T. B., ÅSBERG, J., HARTELIUS, L. & PERSSON, C. 2014. Assessment
of intelligibility using children's spontaneous speech: methodological aspects.
International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 49, 228-239.
LANCASTER, G., KEUSCH, S., LEVIN, A., PRING, T. & MARTIN, S. 2010. Treating
children with phonological problems: does an eclectic approach to therapy work? Int
J Lang Commun Disord, 45, 174-81.
LANDRY, S. H., ASSEL, M. A., CARLO, M. S., WILLIAMS, J. M., WU, W. & MONTROY,
J. J. 2019. The effect of the Preparing Pequeños small-group cognitive instruction
program on academic and concurrent social and behavioral outcomes in young
Spanish-speaking dual-language learners. Journal of School Psychology, 73, 1-20.
LANGEVIN, M., PACKMAN, A. & ONSLOW, M. 2010. Parent perceptions of the impact
of stuttering on their preschoolers and themselves. J Commun Disord, 43, 407-23.
LAW, J., BOYLE, J., HARRIS, F., HARKNESS, A. & NYE, C. 2000. The feasibility of
Universal screening for primary speech and language delay: Findings from a
systematic review of the literature Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology,
42, 190-200.
LAW, J., CHARLTON, J. & ASMUSSEN, K. 2017a. Language as a Child Wellbeing
Indicator. London: Early Intervention Foundation.
LAW, J., CHARLTON, J., DOCKRELL, J., GASCOIGNE, M., MCKEAN, C. &
THEAKSTON, A. 2017b. Early Language Development: Needs, provision, and
intervention for preschool children from socio-economically disadvantage
backgrounds., London, Institute of Education.
LAW, J., CHARLTON, J., MCKEAN, C., WATSON, R., ROULSTONE, S., HOLME, C
RUSH, R. 2020. Identifying and Supporting Children's Early Language Needs.
Newcastle upon Tyne: Newcastle University.
157
LAW, J., CHARLTON, J., WILSON, P., RUSH, R., GILROY, V. & MCKEAN, C. 2023. The
development and productivity of a measure for identifying low language abilities in
children aged 24-36 months. BMC Pediatrics, 23, 495.
LAW, J., MCBEAN, K. & RUSH, R. 2011. Communication skills in a population of primary
school-aged children raised in an area of pronounced social disadvantage.
International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders, 46, 657-664.
LAW, J., REILLY, S. & MCKEAN, C. 2022. Language Development: Individual
Differences in a Social Context. In: LAW, J., REILLY, S. & MCKEAN, C. (eds.)
Language Development: Individual Differences in a Social Context. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
LAW, J., RUSH, R., SCHOON, I. & PARSONS, S. 2009. Modelling developmental
language difficulties from school entry into adulthood: Literacy, mental health, and
employment outcomes. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 52,
1401-1416.
LAW, J., TULIP, J., STRINGER, H., COCKERILL, M. & DOCKRELL, J. 2019. Teachers
observing classroom communication: An application of the Communicating
Supporting Classroom Observation Tool for children aged 4-7 years. Child
Language Teaching and Therapy, 35, 203-220.
LE, H. N. D., MENSAH, F., EADIE, P., MCKEAN, C., SCIBERRAS, E., BAVIN, E. L.,
GOLD, L. 2021. Health-related quality of life of children with low language from
early childhood to adolescence: results from an Australian longitudinal population-
based study. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 62, 349-356.
LEE, W. & PRING, T. 2016. Supporting language in schools: Evaluating an intervention
for children with delayed language in the early school years. Child Language
Teaching and Therapy, 32, 135 - 146.
LYSONS, J., MÉNDEZ PINEDA, R., ALARCON, G., AQUINO, M. R. J., CANN, H.,
FEARON,
P. WOODMAN, J. 2024. Measuring child development at the 2-2½
year health and development review: A review of available tools, stakeholder
priorities, and learning to support successful implementation of a tool for routine
health care use, London, NIHR Policy Research Unit Children and Families.
MCALLISTER, J., COLLIER, J. & SHEPSTONE, L. 2012. The impact of adolescent
stuttering on educational and employment outcomes: evidence from a birth cohort
study. J Fluency Disord, 37, 106-21.
MCCARTNEY, E., BOYLE, J., ELLIS, S., BANNATYNE, S. & TURNBULL, M. 2011.
Indirect language therapy for children with persistent language impairment in
158
mainstream primary schools: outcomes from a cohort intervention. International
Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 46, 74-82.
MCCORMACK, J., MCLEOD, S., MCALLISTER, L. & HARRISON, L. J. 2009. A
systematic review of the association between childhood speech impairment and
participation across the lifespan. International Journal of Speech-Language
Pathology, 11, 155-170.
MCDONALD, D., PROCTOR, P., GILL, W., HEAVEN, S., MARR, J. & YOUNG, J. 2015.
Increasing early childhood educators' use of communication-facilitating and
language-modelling strategies: Brief speech and language therapy training. Child
Language Teaching and Therapy, 31, 305-322.
MCDONALD, S. & KENT, J. 2022. How 'inner setting factors' affect the implementation of
early years communication strategies: evaluation of the Language Lead Approach.
Early Years, 42, 496-511.
MCINTOSH, B. & DODD, B. 2009. Evaluation of Core Vocabulary intervention for
treatment of inconsistent phonological disorder: Three treatment case studies. Child
Language Teaching and Therapy, 25, 09-29.
MCKEAN, C., CHARLTON, J., JACK, C., ARMSTRONG, E. & GILROY, V. 2023. Talking
2gether: Collaborative Health Visitor (HV) and Early Years setting implementation of
the early language identification measure and intervention. EEF.
MCKEAN, C., GERRITS, E., TULIP, J. & TOLONEN, A.-K. 2019. Service delivery for
children with language disorders across Europe and beyond. In: LAW, J., MCKEAN,
C., MURPHY, C. A. & THORDARDOTTIR, E. (eds.) Managing Children with
Developmental Language Disorder. Routledge.
MCKEAN, C., LAW, J., LAING, K., COCKERILL, M., ALLON-SMITH, J., MCCARTNEY,
E. & FORBES, J. 2017a. A qualitative case study in the social capital of co-
professional collaborative co-practice for children with speech language and
communication needs. International Journal of Language and Communication
Disorders, 52, 514-527.
MCKEAN, C., MENSAH, F. K., EADIE, P., BAVIN, E. L., BRETHERTON, L., CINI, E. &
REILLY, S. 2015. Levers for language growth: Characteristics and predictors of
language trajectories between 4 and 7 years. PLoS ONE, 10, e0134251.
MCKEAN, C. & REILLY, S. 2023. Creating the conditions for robust early language
development for all: Part two: Evidence informed public health framework for child
language in the early years. International Journal of Language & Communication
Disorders, n/a.
159
MCKEAN, C., REILLY, S., BAVIN, E. L., BRETHERTON, L., CINI, E., CONWAY, L.,
MENSAH, F. 2017b. Language Outcomes at 7 Years: Early Predictors and Co-
occurring Difficulties. Pediatrics.
MCKEAN, C., REILLY, S., MORGAN, A. & LAW, J. 2018. Developmental Language
Disorder. In: RUESCHEMEYER, S. & GASKELL, G. M. (eds.) Oxford Handbook of
Psycholinguistics.
MCKEAN, C., WATSON, R., CHARLTON, J., ROULSTONE, S., HOLME, C., GILROY, V.
& LAW, J. 2022. 'Making the most of together time': development of a Health
Visitor-led intervention to support children's early language and communication
development at the 2-2(1/2)-year-old review. Pilot Feasibility Study, 8, 35.
MCKEAN, C., WRAITH, D., EADIE, P., COOK, F., MENSAH, F. & REILLY, S. 2017c.
Subgroups in language trajectory from 4 to 11 years: the nature and predictors of
stable, improving, and declining language trajectory groups. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 58, 1081-1091.
MCLEOD, S. 2006. A holistic view of a child with unintelligible speech: Insights from the
ICF and ICF-CY. Advances in Speech Language Pathology, 8, 293-315.
MCLEOD, S. 2020. Intelligibility in Context Scale: Cross-linguistic use, validity, and
reliability. Speech, Language and Hearing, 23, 9-16.
MCLEOD, S. 2024. Multilingual Speech: Speech Participation and Activity Assessment of
Children [Online]. Available: https://www.csu.edu.au/research/multilingual-
speech/spaa-c [Accessed February 2024].
MCLEOD, S. & BAKER, E. 2014. Speech-language pathologists' practices regarding
assessment, analysis, target selection, intervention, and service delivery for children
with speech sound disorders. Clin Linguist Phon, 28, 508-31.
MCLEOD, S., CROWE, K. & SHAHAEIAN, A. 2015. Intelligibility in Context Scale:
Normative and Validation Data for English-Speaking Preschoolers. Lang Speech
Hear Serv Sch, 46, 266-76.
MCLEOD, S., DAVIS, E., ROHR, K., MCGILL, N., MILLER, K., ROBERTS, A.,
IVORY, N. 2020. Waiting for speech-language pathology services: A randomised
controlled trial comparing therapy, advice and device. Int J Speech Lang Pathol, 22,
372-386.
MCLEOD, S., HARRISON, L. J. & MCCORMACK, J. 2012a. Intelligibility in Context
Scale., Bathurst, NSW, Australia, Charles Sturt University.
160
MCLEOD, S., HARRISON, L. J. & MCCORMACK, J. 2012b. The intelligibility in Context
Scale: validity and reliability of a subjective rating measure. J Speech Lang Hear
Res, 55, 648-56.
MCLEOD, S., VERDON, S., MARGETSON, K., TRAN, V. H., WANG, C. H., PHAM, B.,
HUYNH, K. 2023. Multilingual Speech Acquisition by Vietnamese-English-
Speaking Children and Adult Family Members. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 66, 2184-2229.
MICHAEL, P., GREG, F. & MICHAEL, W. 2013. Principles for high-quality, high-value
testing. Evidence Based Medicine, 18, 5.
MICHIE, S., VAN STRALEN, M. M. & WEST, R. 2011. The behaviour change wheel: a
new method for characterising and designing behaviour change interventions.
Implementation Science, 6.
MILLARD, S. K., EDWARDS, S. & COOK, F. M. 2009. Parent-child interaction therapy:
Adding to the evidence. International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 11,
61-76.
MYERS-SCOTTON, C. 2006. Natural codeswitching knocks on the laboratory door.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 9, 203-212.
NAIR, V. K. K., CLARK, G. T., SIYAMBALAPITIYA, S. & REUTERSKIÖLD, C. 2023.
Language intervention in bilingual children with developmental language disorder: A
systematic review. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders,
58, 576-600.
NAMASIVAYAM, A. K., HUYNH, A., GRANATA, F., LAW, V. & VAN LIESHOUT, P. 2021.
PROMPT intervention for children with severe speech motor delay: a randomized
control trial. Pediatr Res, 89, 613-621.
NATIONAL STATISTICS. 2019. English indices of deprivation 2019 [Online]. Available:
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/english-indices-of-deprivation-2019
[Accessed].
PATTERSON, D., OKUBO, T. & MCLEOD, P. 2013. Briefing Paper 004: Infant Language
Link: The development of a Universal screening tool for mainstream primary
schools, Cambridge, SpeechLink.
PATTERSON, D., OKUBO, T. & MCLEOD, P. 2014. Briefing Paper 005: Reception
Language Link: The further development of a Universal receptive language
screening tool for mainstream reception classes, Cambridge, SpeechLink.
161
PERT, S. 2023. Working with Children Experiencing Speech and Language Disorders in
a Bilingual Context: A home language approach, Routledge.
PERT, S. & BRADLEY, B. 2018. Clinical Guidelines for Speech and Language
Therapists: Bilingualism: Working with bilingual clients/patients with speech,
language and communication needs. In: RCSLT (ed.).
PHILLIPS, B. M., TABULDA, G., INGROLE, S. A., BURRIS, P. W., SEDGWICK, T. K. &
CHEN, S. 2016. Literate Language Intervention with High-Need Prekindergarten
Children: A Randomized Trial. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research,
1, 1409-1420.
PLYMOUTH UNIVERSITY BABY LAB. 2024. UKBTAT Assessment Tool [Online].
Available: https://www.psy.plymouth.ac.uk/UKBTAT/ [Accessed February 2024].
PRESTON, J. & EDWARDS, M. L. 2010. Phonological awareness and types of sound
errors in preschoolers with speech sound disorders. J Speech Lang Hear Res, 53,
44-60.
PRESTON, J. L., HULL, M. & EDWARDS, M. L. 2013. Preschool speech error patterns
predict articulation and phonological awareness outcomes in children with histories
of speech sound disorders. Am J Speech Lang Pathol, 22, 173-84.
PUBLIC HEALTH ENGLAND 2020. Best start in speech, language and communication:
Case studies
PURPURA, D. J., NAPOLI, A. R., WEHRSPANN, E. & GOLD, Z. S. 2017. Causal
Connections Between Mathematical Language and Mathematical Knowledge: A
Dialogic Reading Intervention. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness,
10, 116 - 137.. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 10, 116-137.
RCSLT 2022. The Sustained Impact of COVID-19 on Speech and Language Therapy
Services in the UK. London RCSLT.
RCSLT. 2024. Speech Sound Disorders - Overview. Available:
https://www.rcslt.org/speech-and-language-therapy/clinical-information/speech-
sound-disorders/ [Accessed 13/05/2023].
REEVES, L., HARTSHORNE, M., BLACK, R., ATKINSON, J., BAXTER, A. & PRING, T.
2018. Early talk boost: A Targeted intervention for three year old children with
delayed language development. Child Language Teaching and Therapy, 34, 53-62.
REILLY, S., BAVIN, E., BRETHERTON, L., EADIE, P., PRIOR, M., UKOUMUNNE, O
SKEAT, J. Predicting language impairment in four-year-olds: child, parent and
family risk factors and links to late talking at two years. Royal College of Speech
162
and Language Therapists Scientific Conference 2009: Partners in progress:
spreading the word, 2009 London.
REILLY, S. & MCKEAN, C. 2023. Creating the conditions for robust early language
development for all: Part 1: Evidence informed child language surveillance in the
early years. International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders.
REILLY, S., MCKEAN, C. & LEVICKIS, P. 2014a. Late talking: can it predict later
language difficulties? Research Snapshot.
REILLY, S., MCKEAN, C., MORGAN, A. & WAKE, M. 2015. Identifying and managing
common childhood language and speech impairments. British Medical Journal
(Clinical research ed.), 350, h2318.
REILLY, S., TOMBLIN, B., LAW, J., MCKEAN, C., MENSAH, F. K., MORGAN, A.
WAKE, M. 2014b. Specific Language Impairment: A convenient label for whom?
International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders, 49, 416-451.
RENFREW, C. 2001. The Bus Story: A Test of Narrative Speech (Revised),
Speechmark.
RENFREW, C. 2019. Action Picture Test - 5th Edition, Speechmark.
RESTREPO, M. A., MORGAN, G. P. & THOMPSON, M. S. 2013. The efficacy of a
vocabulary intervention for dual-language learners with language impairment. J
Speech Lang Hear Res, 56, 748-65.
RODEN, I., FRÜCHTENICHT, K., KREUTZ, G., LINDERKAMP, F. & GRUBE, D. 2019.
Auditory stimulation training with technically manipulated musical material in
preschool children with specific language impairments: An explorative study.
Frontiers in Psychology, 10.
ROTH, F. P., TROIA, G. A., WORTHINGTON, C. K. & HANDY, D. 2006. Promoting
awareness of sounds in speech (PASS): The effects of intervention and stimulus
characteristics on the blending performance of preschool children with
communication impairments. Learning Disability Quarterly 29, 67-88.
ROULSTONE, S., WREN, Y., BAKOPOULOU, I., GOODLAD, S. & LINDSAY, G. 2012.
Exploring interventions for children and young people with speech, language and
communication needs: A study of practice. London: Department for Education.
ROWE, M. L. & SNOW, C. E. 2020. Analyzing input quality along three dimensions:
interactive, linguistic, and conceptual. J Child Lang, 47, 5-21.
163
RUDOLPH, J. M. & WENDT, O. 2014. The efficacy of the cycles approach: a multiple
baseline design. J Commun Disord, 47, 1-16.
RVACHEW, S. 2007. Phonological Processing and Reading in Children with Speech
Sound Disorders. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 16, 260-270.
RVACHEW, S. & GRAWBURG, M. 2006. Correlates of phonological awareness in
preschoolers with speech sound disorders. Journal of speech, language, and
hearing research: JSLHR, 49 1, 74-87.
RVACHEW, S. & MATTHEWS, T. 2019. An N-of-1 Randomized Controlled Trial of
Interventions for Children with Inconsistent Speech Sound Errors. J Speech Lang
Hear Res, 62, 3183-3203.
RVACHEW, S., NOWAK, M. & CLOUTIER, G. 2004. Effect of phonemic perception
training on the speech production and phonological awareness skills of children with
expressive phonological delay. Am J Speech Lang Pathol, 13, 250-63.
RVACHEW, S., RAFAAT, S. & MARTIN, M. 1999. Stimulability, speech perception skills,
and the treatment of phonological disorders. American Journal of Speech -
Language Pathology, 8, 33.
SANDWELL AND WEST BIRMINGHAM HOSPITALS NHS TRUST 2015. Wellcomm: A
Speech and Language Toolkit for Screening and Intervention in the Early Years:
Revised Edition, GL Assessment.
SCHÖLDERLE, T., HAAS, E., BAUMEISTER, S. & ZIEGLER, W. 2021. Intelligibility,
Articulation Rate, Fluency, and Communicative Efficiency in Typically Developing
Children. J Speech Lang Hear Res, 64, 2575-2585.
SCHOON, I., PARSONS, S., RUSH, R. & LAW, J. 2009. Children's language ability and
psychosocial development: A 29-year follow-up study. Pediatrics, 126.
SCHOON, I., PARSONS, S., RUSH, R. & LAW, J. 2010. Childhood language skills and
adult literacy: A 29-year follow-up study. Pediatrics, 125, e459-e466.
SEAGER, E. & ABBOT-SMITH, K. 2016. Can early years professionals determine which
preschoolers have comprehension delays? A comparison of two screening tools.
Child Language Teaching and Therapy, 33, 67-79.
SHAPIRO, L. R. & SOLITY, J. 2008. Delivering phonological and phonics training within
whole-class teaching. Br J Educ Psychol, 78, 597-620.
SHILLER, D. M. & ROCHON, M. L. 2014. Auditory-perceptual learning improves speech
motor adaptation in children. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform, 40, 1308-15.
164
SHONKOFF, J.P. 2011. Protecting brains, not simply stimulating minds. Science, 333,
982-983.
SILVERMAN, R. D., CRANDELL, J. D. & CARLIS, L. J. 2013. Read Alouds and Beyond:
The Effects of Read Aloud Extension Activities on Vocabulary in Head Start
Classrooms. Early Education and Development, 24, 122 - 198.
SMIT, A. B., BRUMBAUGH, K. M., WELTSCH, B. & HILGERS, M. 2018. Treatment of
Phonological Disorder: A Feasibility Study with Focus on Outcome Measures. Am J
Speech Lang Pathol, 27, 536-552.
SMITH-LOCK, K. M., LEITÃO, S., PRIOR, P. & NICKELS, L. 2015. The Effectiveness of
Two Grammar Treatment Procedures for Children With SLI: A Randomized Clinical
Trial. Lang Speech Hear Serv Sch, 46, 312-24.
SMITH, C., GIBBARD, D. & HIGGINS, L. 2017. An evaluation of an integrated model of
speech and language therapy in public health practice for early language
development. Child Language Teaching and Therapy, 33, 187-198.
SOTO, X., OLSZEWSKI, A. & GOLDSTEIN, H. 2019. A Systematic Review of
Phonological Awareness Interventions for Latino Children in Early and Primary
Grades. Journal of Early Intervention, 41, 340-365.
SPEECH AND LANGUAGE UK. Progress Checker [Online]. Available: https://progress-
checker.speechandlanguage.org.uk/ [Accessed February 2024].
SPEECH&LANGUAGELINK. 2023. Discover the impact Speech Link and Language Link
have on students' speech language and communication skills. Speech and
Language Link. [Online]. Available: https://speechandlanguage.link/wp-
content/uploads/2024/04/online-impact-brochure-sept-2023.pdf [Accessed].
SPENCER, T. D., MORAN, M., THOMPSON, M. S., PETERSEN, D. B. & RESTREPO,
M. A. 2020. Early Efficacy of Multitiered Dual-Language Instruction: Promoting
Preschoolers' Spanish and English Oral Language. AERA Open, 6(1),
233285841989788.. AERA Open, 6, 233285841989788.
SQUIRES, J. & BRICKER, D. 2009. Squires, J., & Bricker, D. (2009). Ages & Stages
Questionnaires®, Third Edition (ASQ®-3): A Parent-Completed Child Monitoring
System. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co., Inc., Baltimore, Paul H.
Brookes Publishing Co., Inc.
STRINGER, H. 2019. Assessment for Phonological Awareness (NAPA) (1st ed.).
Newcastle, Newcastle University UK.
165
TEDDY TALK TEST. 2022. Teddy Talk Test [Online]. Available:
https://www.teddytalktest.co.uk/ [Accessed].
TRACEY, L., BOWYER-CRANE, C., BONETTI, S., NIELSEN, D., D'APICE, K. &
COMPTON, S. 2022. The impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on children's socio-
emotional wellbeing and attainment during the Reception Year.
TREBACZ, A., MCKEAN, C., PERT, S. & STRINGER, H. 2023. Piloting Building Early
Sentences Therapy for pre-school children with low language abilities: an
examination of efficacy and the role of sign as an active ingredient. International
Journal of Language and Communication Disorders 00, 1-24.
TYLER, A. A., GILLON, G., MACRAE, T. & JOHNSON, R. 2011. Direct and indirect
effects of stimulating phoneme awareness vs. other linguistic skills in preschoolers
with co-occurring speech and language impairments. Topics in Language
Disorders, 31, 128-144.
TYLER, A. A. & LEWIS, K. E. 2005. Relationships Among Consistency/Variability and
Other Phonological Measures Over Time. Topics in Language Disorders, 25, 243-
25.
TYLER, A. A., WILLIAMS, M. J. & LEWIS, K. E. 2006. Error consistency and the
evaluation of treatment outcomes. Clin Linguist Phon, 20, 411-22.
VAN DER LELY, H., GARDNER, H., MCCLELLAND, A. & FROUD, K. 2006. Grammar
and Phonology Screening Test (GAPS): Technical Manual, Knaresborough Heather
van der Lely Foundation.
VUATTOUX, D., JAPEL, C., DION, É. & DUPÉRÉ, V. 2014. Targeting the Specific
Vocabulary Needs of At-Risk Preschoolers: A Randomized Study of the
Effectiveness of an Educator-Implemented Intervention. P. Prevention Science 15,
156-164.
VYGOTSKY, L. 1986. Thought and Language, translation newly revised and edited by A.
Kozulin. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
WASHINGTON, K. N. & WARR-LEEPER, G. A. 2013. Visual support in intervention for
preschoolers with specific language impairment. Topics in Language Disorders, 33,
347-365.
WEST, G., LERVÃG, A., BIRCHENOUGH, J. M. H., KORELL, C., RIOS DIAZ, M., DUTA,
M.
HULME, C. 2024. Oral language enrichment in preschool improves
children's language skills: a cluster randomised controlled trial. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, n/a.
166
WEST, G., SNOWLING, M. J., LERVÃG, A., BUCHANAN-WORSTER, E., DUTA, M.,
HALL, A.,
HULME, C. 2021. Early language screening and intervention can be
delivered successfully at scale: evidence from a cluster randomized controlled trial.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 62, 1425-1434.
WESTRUPP, E. M., REILLY, S., MCKEAN, C., LAW, J., MENSAH, F. & NICHOLSON, J.
M. 2020. Vocabulary Development and Trajectories of Behavioral and Emotional
Difficulties Via Academic Ability and Peer Problems. Child Development, 91, e365-
e382.
WILCOX, M. J., GRAY, S. & REISER, M. 2020. Preschoolers with developmental speech
and/or language impairment: Efficacy of the Teaching Early Literacy and Language
(TELL) curriculum. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 51, 124-143.
WILSON, P., RUSH, R., CHARLTON, J., GILROY, V., MCKEAN, C. & LAW, J. 2022.
Universal language development screening: comparative performance of two
questionnaires. BMJ Paediatrics Open, 6, e001324.
WILSON, P., WOOD, R., LYKKE, K., HAUSKOV GRAUNGAARD, A., ERTMANN, R. K.,
ANDERSEN, M. K.
HIETANEN, M. 2018. International variation in programmes
for assessment of children's neurodevelopment in the community: Understanding
disparate approaches to evaluation of motor, social, emotional, behavioural and
cognitive function. Scand J Public Health, 46, 805-816.
WREN, Y., MILLER, L. L., PETERS, T. J., EMOND, A. & ROULSTONE, S. 2016.
Prevalence and Predictors of Persistent Speech Sound Disorder at Eight Years Old:
Findings from a Population Cohort Study. J Speech Lang Hear Res, 59, 647-73.
WREN, Y., PAGNAMENTA, E., ORCHARD, F., PETERS, T. J., EMOND, A.,
NORTHSTONE, K., ROULSTONE, S. 2023. Social, emotional and behavioural
difficulties associated with persistent speech disorder in children: A prospective
population study. JCPP Adv, 3, e12126.
YAIRI, E. & AMBROSE, N. 2013. Epidemiology of stuttering: 21st century advances. J
Fluency Disord, 38, 66-87.
YODER, P., CAMARATA, S. & GARDNER, E. 2005. Treatment effects on speech
intelligibility and length of utterance in children with specific language and
intelligibility impairments. Journal of Early Intervention 28, 34-49.
ZUCKER, T. A., CARLO, M. S., LANDRY, S. H., MASOOD-SALEEM, S. S., WILLIAMS,
J. M. & BHAVSAR, V. 2019. Iterative Design and Pilot Testing of the Developing
Talkers Tiered Academic Language Curriculum for Pre-Kindergarten and
Kindergarten. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 12, 274-306.
167
ZUCKER, T.A., SOLARI, E.J., LANDRY, S. H. & SWANK, P.R. 2013. Effects of a Brief
Tiered Language Intervention for Prekindergartners at Risk. Early Education and
Development, 24, 366-392.
ZUNIGA-MONTANEZ C, DAVIES C, LIGOXYGAKIS L, KAŠCELAN D, GONZALEZ-
GOMEZ N. 2025 Annual Research Review: How did COVID-19 affect young
children's language environment and language development? A scoping review.
Journal of Child Psychology Psychiatry. 66(4), 569-587.
168
Department
for Education
© Department for Education Copyright 2025
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0,
except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit
nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3
Where we have identified any third-party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
Reference: RR1553
ISBN: 978-1-83870-705-7
For any enquiries regarding this publication, contact www.gov.uk/contact-dfe.
This document is available for download at www.gov.uk/government/publications.
169
