Department
for Education
Supporting
stammering, speech
and language needs
in the early years:
rapid review and case
study methodology
Methodology report
September 2025
Authors: McKean, c., Charlton, J.,
Knowland, V., Stringer, H., Thomas, U.,
Whelan, A., Millard, S., Levickis, P.,
Murray, L., Richardson, E.
Contents
List of figures
3
List of tables
4
Executive summary
5
Introduction
5
Identification and assessment methods
5
Intervention and support methods
5
Working together methods
6
Introduction
7
Work package 1: Identification and assessment
9
Research questions
9
Methods
9
Search strategy
9
Inclusion criteria
10
Search results
11
Extraction and appraisal of data
12
Characterising the tools
12
Appraisal
13
Work package 2: Intervention and support
14
Research questions
14
Methods
14
Search strategy
15
Inclusion criteria
16
Systematic reviews
16
Intervention studies
16
Search results
17
Review and evaluation of intervention studies
18
Data extraction and appraisal
18
Template for Intervention Description and Replication (TIDieR) framework
19
Study quality indicators
20
1
Effect sizes
21
Levels of evidence
22
Analysis of approaches used in specialist interventions
23
Work package 3: Working together
24
Research questions
24
Rapid literature review methods
24
Search strategy
25
Peer reviewed articles
25
Grey literature, thesis and websites
26
Case study methods
28
Ethics
29
Participants
29
Procedure
29
Data analysis
30
Appendices
31
Appendix A: Definitions of key psychometric constructs
31
Appendix B: Criteria for psychometric quality judgements
33
Appendix C: Working together search terms
35
Appendix D: Case study email template
36
Appendix E: Early years settings interview questions
37
References
39
Systematic reviews identified in our review
40
2
List of figures
Figure 1. Flow chart for identification and assessment search
12
Figure 2. Flow chart for intervention and support search
18
Figure 3. Evidence hierarchy
22
Figure 4. Flow chart for the working together search of peer-reviewed articles
26
Figure 5. Flow chart for the working together search of grey literature articles
28
3
List of tables
Table 1. Effect size table and corresponding months of progress and impact (using EEF
guidance)
21
4
Executive summary
Introduction
This rapid review, commissioned by the Department for Education (DfE) and conducted
from February to July 2024, aimed to identify the best available evidence to guide early
years practitioners in supporting children aged 0-5 with speech, language, and
communication needs (SLCN), specifically stammering, speech sound issues, and
language development. Excluding autism-related communication needs, the review
focused on three areas: (1) identification and assessment, (2) intervention and support,
and (3) working together. Varied evidence sources and tailored methods for each work
package were employed.
Identification and assessment methods
This work package of the rapid review focused on identifying and evaluating tools that
non-specialist early years staff can use to identify stammering, speech, and language
needs in young children. Using a multi-source search strategy, including database
searches, web reviews, and expert input, we identified 22 relevant tools and assessed
their characteristics and psychometric properties (e.g. reliability, validity, usability,
accuracy in identifying needs). The review aimed to determine which tools are most
suitable for formative assessment and decision-making around universal, targeted, or
specialist support.
Intervention and support methods
This part of the rapid review examined the effectiveness of speech and language
interventions for children that can be delivered by early years practitioners, using existing
systematic reviews and the What Works database. While no suitable studies were found
for stammering interventions at universal or targeted levels, 25 studies on speech and
language were identified and appraised for their characteristics, effectiveness, and
quality.
Using the TIDieR framework, each intervention was detailed by its components, delivery
method, and rationale, while study quality was assessed using nine indicators (e.g.
fidelity, blinding, validity). Effect sizes were calculated using Hedges g and interpreted
using Education Endowment Foundation (EEF) guidance to show impact in months of
progress. Additionally, techniques from specialist interventions were reviewed to identify
safe, practical strategies that could be adapted for universal or targeted use by non-
specialists. The findings aim to guide practitioners in selecting appropriate interventions
5
based on children's needs, the level of support required, and the best fit to their setting's
unique context.
Working together methods
This section of the rapid review explored collaborative models between early years
settings and professionals such as speech and language therapists (SLTs), health
visitors (HVs), educational psychologists (EPs), and parents to support children's speech,
language, and stammering needs. Using peer-reviewed and grey literature alongside
case studies analysed through the Theoretical Domains Framework and COM-B model,
the review identified nine academic papers and five grey literature sources, highlighting
key components of effective collaboration including training, knowledge exchange, and
flexible intervention pathways.
6
Introduction
This rapid review was commissioned by the Department for Education and was
completed between February and July 2024. The aim was to identify the best current
evidence to inform the provision of universal and targeted support for children with
speech, language and communication needs (SLCN) by early years practitioners.
The review focuses on identification, support and interventions, and working
collaboratively for children with stammering, speech or language needs (aged 0-5):
Stammering (also known as stuttering) is characterised by whole and part-word
repetitions, prolongations and blocking of sounds, and may be accompanied by
physical tension, additional movements, and/or avoidance of words or speaking.
Speech refers to the production and use of speech sounds including consonants
(e.g. p, b, m, s) and vowels (e.g. ah, ee, oo) to convey a message in a given
language.
Language is the understanding and use of words, sentences and grammatical
markers (e.g. -ing; -ed) to share meaning.
The review does not address the needs of children with autism and/or pragmatic or social
communication needs. This was both because a parallel review for autism was planned
where we anticipated relevant research for communication needs would be identified and
to ensure the scope of the review was possible with the available resources and time
frame.
The review comprised three work packages to identify evidence relevant to the non-
specialist early years workforce with respect to:
1. Identification and assessment
2. Intervention and support
3. Working together
This methodology report describes the methods used to identify studies discussed in our
review Supporting stammering, speech, and language needs in the early years. A
Supplementary Evidence Report is also available and published by Newcastle University,
which provides additional detailed results, data extraction tables and analyses.
Rapid review methods provide an overview and synthesis of the available evidence of
relevance to each work package. As such, they do not guarantee a fully comprehensive
identification of all available evidence. The nature of available evidence for each work
package varied. For example, in work package 1: Identification and assessment tools,
evidence consisted of assessment manuals and peer-reviewed papers; for work package
7
2: interventions and support, evidence was peer-reviewed papers; and for work package
3: working together, the literature was peer-reviewed papers and grey literature, as well
as qualitative case studies. Given this, differing methods were used to identify, appraise
and synthesis the evidence for each, and are outlined in turn.
8
Work package 1: Identification and assessment
In order to meet the goals of this rapid review we carried out a desk-based review of
available measures and tools for identifying stammering, speech and language needs in
early childhood by non-specialist staff.
Research questions
The aim of the work package was to identify and compare the effectiveness of different
measures and tools for identifying stammering and potential speech and language needs
during formative assessment.
Which measurement tools are available to early years practitioners to identify
children's stammering, speech, and language needs across the early years?
What are the performance parameters of these measurement tools (e.g. reliability/
validity/ specificity)?
Which measurement tools are most appropriate for use by staff in early
years settings? What are the advantages and disadvantages of the different
tools?
How can these tools be used to guide decisions regarding the provision of
universal, targeted or specialist support? What profiles of need require specialist
approaches?
Which profiles of need are likely to require immediate specialist referral?
Methods
We applied recognised search, and data extraction strategies and methods of data
extraction, summary and appraisal used in 'desk-based' and/or scoping reviews (Grant
and Booth, 2009).
Search strategy
The search strategy to identify published tools included 5 approaches:
1. A list of prespecified tools in the specification from DfE
2. Tools identified in existing systematic reviews of identification tools known to
the research team (Feltner et al., 2024, Baker et al., 2022)
3. Web searches of UK assessment publishers: GL Assessment; Pearson Clinical
Assessment UK; Gov.UK; and Grey literature (e.g. on Speech and Language
Therapy and Early Years services webpages)
9
4. Database search: Three databases most likely to yield relevant literature were
searched for reviews of identification tools (Embase; Scopus; EBSCO: ERIC).
Search strategies for these databases used both indexing terms and free text
searching and were designed for rapid retrieval by searching titles and records
published in English. Search terms included: Review AND Language OR
Speech OR Communication OR Stammer*ing OR Stutter*ing AND Tool*s OR
Identification OR Screening
5. Finally, the team reviewed the list and added additional tools which they are
aware are in widespread use, but which did not appear in the above searches.
This was, in the main, due to the date of development being earlier than 2013
Once the tools were identified we sourced publications to provide the necessary details
to summarise the characteristics of the tools and appraise the tools psychometric
properties. To do this we first identified manuals and primary papers which described the
development and psychometric properties of the tools. We then conducted searches in
SCOPUS and EBSCO for papers published after the date of the manual publication,
which included the name of the tool in the title or abstract to check if further evaluation
had been conducted. We also checked with the authors themselves on whether further
evaluations had been published.
As this is a rapid review it cannot be guaranteed that our search yielded a fully
comprehensive list, but we can be confident that it included the large majority of those
available and in use.
Inclusion criteria
Tools were included for appraisal applying the following inclusion and exclusion criteria
Include if:
Prespecified in DfE specification
Early Language Identification Measure (ELIM)
Language Screen
WellComm
Progress checker
Infant Language Link
Every Child a Talker (ECAT)
Or if:
Covered relevant age range
10
Assessed stammering, speech, and/or language
Can be used by early years educators
UK developed/adapted
Where no or limited available tools for a specific domain were available (i.e. stammering,
speech or language), then inclusion criteria were relaxed to consider:
Non-UK tools
Professional guidelines
Tools were excluded if they were:
For children aged above 6 years of age
Published pre-2013 (with the exception of tools specified by DfE or known to be in
widespread use)
Search results
The results of the search for identification and assessment are documented in a flow
diagram in Figure 1. Existing reviews retrieved via database searching yielded a total of
26 reviews and combined with the 6 existing reviews known to the Newcastle team,
resulted in a total of 32 studies. After duplicates and those that did not meet the inclusion
criteria were removed, a total of 23 studies were retrieved from database searching.
The wider web and grey literature yielded a further 50 studies, with 40 of the studies then
excluded due to not meeting the inclusion criteria (wrong age, specialist, not
standardised), resulting in 10 papers being included. 6 tools were also requested by DfE
to be included.
After duplicates removed, a total of 22 studies across searching via databases, the wider
web and tools already known and/or requested were included in the review.
11
Figure 1. Flow chart for identification and assessment search
Tools requested
Existing reviews known: n= 6
Existing reviews retrieved via databases:
Wider web + grey literature
from DfE: n = 6
tools:
Baker, Anzai, Dockrell,
EMBSCO n = 20 (1 relevant)
Law, Denman, Feltner
EMBASE n = 110 (13 relevant)
GL Assessment n = 5
Scopus n = 181 (12 relevant)
Pearson Clinical UK n = 37
Gov.UK n = 2 (ELIM/EYFS)
Total reviews: n = 26
Grey n = 6
Total: n= 50
Total Duplicates: n = 19
Met initial inclusion criteria: n = 7
Law 2000, Feltner, Nelson, So, Sim,
Wallace, Larson
Duplicates across known and retrieved reviews: n = 2
Total reviews included: n = 11
Total number of tools in reviews: n = 158
Excluded:
Excluded:
Specialist n = 19
Not UK n = 88
Wrong age n = 1
Not standardised n = 17
Specialist n = 37
Not standardised n = 2
Not SLCN n = 9
Wrong age n = 2
Included: n = 6
Included: n = 23
Included: n = 10
Duplicates: n = 17
Included: n = 22
Extraction and appraisal of data
Characterising the tools
We extracted descriptive information regarding the characteristics of the tools from the
manual, websites and primary research paper(s) where these were available, including:
Name of the measure
Age group(s) assessed (i.e. 0-12 months; 1-3 years; 3-5 years; 5-6 years)
Stammering, speech and/or language domain covered
Specific skills assessed (e.g. vocabulary, speech sounds, grammar)
Type of assessment (e.g. parental report, observation, direct assessment)
Designed for use by which practitioner groups
Brief description
Purpose (i.e. identification of needs, tracking progress, profiling strengths and
weaknesses)
Specified age range (month/years)
12
Cost
User training or qualifications
Appraisal
We extracted and evaluated information regarding the psychometric properties of the
tools identifying whether or not they were reported in the sources we identified. Appendix
A: Definitions of key psychometric constructs provides a list of key psychometric terms
and their definitions. The psychometric properties considered are drawn and adapted
from Asunta et al., 2019, and based on classical test theory as these were reported for
the majority of tools:
Normative sample: consideration of the sample used to develop, standardise and
create norms for the tool in terms of representativeness of the UK population and
size.
Usability: a qualitative judgement regarding how feasible, practical and easy a tool
is for practitioners to use.
Accuracy in identifying needs: Measured using sensitivity/specificity metrics.
Validity: considering concurrent, discriminant and face validity.
Cross-cultural: consideration as to whether tools had been evaluated in in non-
monolingual and/or non-English speaking groups or if the tools, at a minimum,
advise regarding its use with these groups.
Reliability: considering internal consistency, test-retest reliability and inter-rater
reliability.
It is important to note that classical test theory has been challenged in recent years with
respect to potential inaccuracies (Cappelleri et al., 2014). In addition to these classic
psychometric properties, we therefore also noted if tool development had included more
modern methods of development, including Rasch analysis and Item response theory.
These approaches enable higher confidence in a tool's ability to detect individual
differences between children and in individual children over time (Jabrayilov et al., 2016).
Once identified, the level of quality for each metric was rated using recognised guidance
for each metric where available as: not reported; reported but unclear; reported but
quality rating not applicable (i.e. relating to qualitative characteristics); low quality;
moderate quality; and good to excellent. The definitions for quality ratings for each metric
are in Appendix B: Criteria for psychometric quality judgements.
13
Work package 2: Intervention and support
To meet the goals of the rapid review on intervention and support, we carried out a
review of existing systematic reviews of interventions to support speech and language,
and children who stammer. Interventions and approaches included in the review were
those that are suitable for delivery by early years education professionals.
Research questions
To identify the effectiveness of different approaches to supporting children with speech
and language needs or children who stammer at universal, targeted and specialist levels.
To identify techniques and strategies from specialist approaches that require delivery by
a speech and language therapist (SLT) that may be applicable for use by early years
professionals.
What Universal and Targeted approaches are effective at addressing different
types of need across stammering, speech and language for children aged 0-5
years?
What interventions are effective at addressing different types of needs (across
stammering, speech and language) for children at different points across the 0-5
age range (e.g. 0-12 months, 1-3 years, 3-5 years) and with what size of effect?
What is the most appropriate level of delivery (Universal, Targeted, Specialist) for
each of these interventions?
What types of children (with what types of need) appear to respond most to the
different types of approach / intervention?
What recommendations for practice flow from this analysis? In particular, what
advice can we give practitioners to help them to select the most relevant
intervention / approach in individual cases.
Methods
In order to complete this review, we first used existing systematic reviews to identify
intervention studies listed in those which met our inclusion criteria (see under 'Inclusion
criteria'). This reduced the time needed and allowed us to quickly identify relevant studies
with randomised control trial (RCT) and/or quasi-experimental designs.
Following this, we then identified the individual intervention studies in the reviews, which
met our inclusion criteria. We then supplemented this list with the knowledge of the
14
review team and expert colleagues regarding any studies we may have missed and with
a search of the 'What Works' database.
As the focus of this rapid review is for universal and targeted interventions deliverable by
early years practitioners, a detailed summary and synthesis of studies evaluating
interventions at these levels was completed. Although early years practitioners are not in
a position to provide specialist interventions independently, we also extracted data
regarding the characteristics of effective specialist interventions. These were summarised
and synthesised to describe approaches that might have relevance and offer additional
insights regarding the provision of effective universal and targeted approaches. Each of
these steps were completed for language, speech and stammering interventions.
Search strategy
Our goal was to identify intervention studies published in the last 10 years at universal,
targeted and specialist levels. We identified recent systematic reviews (published in the
last 5 years) of interventions to support children's speech, language and communication
or stammering as these would provide a rapid method for identifying the relevant
intervention papers published in the previous 10 years. These reviews included those
already known to the research team and any further reviews found via database
searching.
Systematic reviews were identified via:
Systematic reviews known to the research team
Database searches: Six databases most likely to yield relevant literature were
searched for reviews of intervention for speech, language and communication and
stammering/stuttering including (1) EBSCO: ERIC; (2) EBSCO British Education
Index; (3) Embase; (4) Scopus; (5) Medline; and (6) Web of Science. Search
strategies for these databases used both indexing terms and free text searching
and were designed for rapid retrieval by searching titles and records published in
English in the last 5 years (2018-2023). Search terms included: Systematic
AND/OR review; Language OR Speech OR Communication OR Stammer*ing OR
Stutter*ing AND Intervention
Intervention studies were identified via:
The studies listed in the systematic reviews identified met the inclusion criteria
15
The 'What Works' database¹ (hosted by Speech and Language UK). The What
Works database of interventions for speech, language and communication was
searched for interventions that met the inclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria
The degree to which evidence was available for individual domains of speech, language,
and stammering was variable. Historically and to date there is a larger body of literature
reporting approaches for supporting language than for speech and stammering. In
consideration of this, we applied an 'extended' inclusion criteria for reviews of
interventions for speech and stammering to enable us to gather the most robust and
informative evidence for these. Inclusion and exclusion criteria applied to systematic
reviews and to interventions.
Systematic reviews
Systematic reviews were included if:
Published in last 5 years (2018-2023) for language interventions and the last 10
years (2013-2023) for speech and stammering interventions
Published in English
Relevant interventions for children aged 0-5 years
Systematic review methods
Thematic or non-systematic reviews were included for stammering only
Excluded if:
Published before 2018 for language interventions and 2013 for speech and
stammering interventions
Reports intervention for age 6 and above or adults
Reports intervention for broader neurodevelopmental conditions (e.g., Autism,
Downs Syndrome, Intellectual Disability) or Cleft Palate
Not published in English
Doctoral thesis/unpublished/not peer-reviewed
Intervention studies
Include if:
1 What Works database: A database of evidenced interventions to support children's speech, language and
communication skills.
16
Published in the last 10 years (2013-2023) for language interventions, the last 20
years (2004-2023) for speech interventions, and the last 20 years (2004-2023) for
stammering interventions
An RCT or quasi-experimental design
Relevant for children aged 0-5 years (mean age above 6 years of age)
Published in English
Suitable for early years practitioners to deliver
Exclude if:
Published pre-2013, pre-2004 (speech)
Not RCT or quasi-experimental design
Reports intervention for age 6 and above or adults
Reports intervention for broader neurodevelopmental conditions (e.g., Autism,
Downs Syndrome, Intellectual Disability)
Reports intervention for specific populations (e.g., Cleft Palate, hearing
impairment, Childhood Apraxia of Speech) (for speech interventions)
Reports only data from children who speak a language other than English (for
speech interventions)
Not published in English
Not suitable for early years practitioners to deliver (i.e. specialist/SLT)
Doctoral thesis/unpublished/not peer-reviewed
Search results
Figure 2 describes the process of identification of systematic reviews and individual
studies. The systematic reviews identified and used as sources are listed in a separate
list of references at the end of this report.
Existing reviews retrieved via database searching yielded a total of 60 reviews and
combined with the 20 existing reviews known to the Newcastle team and 84 interventions
sourced from the What Works database, resulted in a total of 164 studies. After
duplicates and those that did not meet the inclusion criteria were excluded, a total of 83
papers were longlisted. Of these, 51 studies focused on language and 23 studies on
speech and 9 were found for stammering. Once shortlisted, 20 papers were included on
language interventions and 5 papers on speech interventions. No papers on stammering
interventions were included.
17
Figure 2. Flow chart for intervention and support search
Existing reviews known:
Existing reviews retrieved via databases
What Works interventions n = 84
Language n 9
EBSCO ERIC n = 55 (14 relevant)
Speech n = 7 (5 extended criteria)
EBSCO British Education Index n = 22 (6 relevant)
Stammering n = 4 (2 extended
Scopus n = 107 (14 relevant)
Excluded:
criteria)
EMBASE n = 36 (5 relevant)
Outside data range n = 62
Total reviews n = 20
Medline n = 18 (5 relevant)
Not RCT/Quasi n = 5
Web of Science n = 98 (16 relevant)
Outside age range n = 4
Autism n 3
Total reviews n = 60
Specialist n = 2
Duplicates n = 41
Included reviews total n = 39: Language n = 24; Speech n = 8; Stammering n = 7
Included n = 8
Papers reviewed total n = 669: Language n = 480; Speech n = 151; Stammering n = 38
Excluded:
Not RCT/Quasi, paper > 10 yrs old, not English n = 379
Specific populations (e.g. ASD, Downs Syndrome) n = 196
No effect of intervention n = 1
Duplicates n = 20
Long list papers total n = 83: Language n = 51; Speech n = 23; Stammering n = 9
Language Interventions
Speech Interventions
Stammering Interventions
Education setting n = 31
Excluded:
Parenting n = 19
Education settings n = 3
Education setting = 1
Clinic 17
Computer programme
Clinic 2
Clinic 1
not applicable to UK
Clinic Home n = 6
practice 3
Universal n 10
Universal n 0
Universal + Targeted n = 5
Universal + Targeted n = 1
Universal n = 0
Targeted n 27
Targeted n = 4
Universal + Targeted n = 0
Specialist n = 9
Specialist n = 15
Targeted n. 0
Specialist n = 9
Included: n = 16 (20 papers)
Included: n = 2 (5 papers)
Included: n = 0
Universal n = 4
Universal + Targeted n = 1
Universal + Targeted n = 2
Targeted n = 1
Targeted n = 10
Specialist n = 0
Review and evaluation of intervention studies
There were no studies found from our search relevant to universal and targeted
interventions for stammering. Therefore, the review and evaluation of the intervention
studies applied to studies related to speech and language interventions.
We systematically extracted relevant data from the intervention studies identified in the
literature reviews to provide an analysis of the characteristics, efficacy, and study quality
of the interventions. This was to support practitioners and settings to evaluate the fit and
feasibility of the interventions for their settings and pupils. We summarised the
characteristics of the interventions using an adaptation of the TIDieR framework
(Hoffmann et al., 2014), the effects using the EEF framework methods for interpreting
effect sizes (Higgins et al., 2012) and summarised study quality using the (Durán et al.,
2016) framework adapted from Cirrin and Gillam (2008) (Shobbrook et al., 2024).
Data extraction and appraisal
Data was extracted for each intervention study into an overarching excel database and
the key characteristics for each intervention were then transferred and inputted into
evidence tables.
18
These key characteristics include:
1. Evidence paper reference (author name and date)
2. Age of children the intervention is appropriate for
3. Speech and language skills targeted by the intervention
4. Participant characteristics (country, universal or targeted, language(s) spoken,
age)
5. Sample size
6. Outcomes measured (speech and language-related only)
7. Summary of findings (speech and language related only)
8. Reported effect size(s) (for statistically significant outcomes only)
Some interventions had more than one paper that met the inclusion criteria. Where this
was the case, we report the key characteristics of each paper associated with the
intervention.
Template for Intervention Description and Replication (TIDieR) framework
We used an adaptation of the TIDieR framework to describe components of the
interventions (Hoffmann et al., 2014). This framework enabled interventions to be
described clearly and comprehensively to support replication and use in practice. The
components of interventions as reported in included studies were extracted against the
following categories:
Name of intervention (Where interventions were not named, we have allocated a
name that represents the key components of intervention)
Why use it? (rationale)
What does it involve?
Materials to deliver it
Who delivers it?
Where is it delivered?
How is it delivered? (e.g. face to face)
How often and how much? (Frequency/dosage, i.e., session duration, over what
period of time)
Tailoring (if the intervention was designed to be personalised or adapted for
individual children or users)
19
Fidelity: can it be delivered as intended? (adherence to intervention
procedures/delivered as intended)
Where interventions have more than one evidence paper, the TIDieR summaries include
combined information extracted from all papers.
Study quality indicators
Each evidence paper was included in this review because its study design (level of
evidence) is relatively robust in that it uses an RCT or quasi-experimental design. RCTs
are higher level of evidence; whether a study uses an RCT design is indicated in the
evidence summary tables. However, the quality of execution of various aspects of these
study designs (procedures/methods) varies substantially. Each evidence paper was
therefore appraised using the (Durán et al., 2016) framework adapted from Cirrin and
Gillam (2008) against a pre-specified set of 9 quality indicators:
1.
For RCTs, the randomisation procedure is clear
2.
There is initial group similarity
3.
Fidelity is reported (adherence to intervention procedures)
4.
Fidelity level is acceptable (more than 80%)
5.
There is blinding of assessors (i.e., assessors were not aware which group
(intervention/control) children were allocated to)
6.
The intervention description is sufficient for replication
7.
Measures are valid and reliable
8.
p values are reported for all outcomes
9.
Effect size(s) are reported
These quality indicators are all important and should be considered together when
appraising evidence.
Whether a criterion was 'met' or 'not met' by evidence is indicated in an evidence
appraisal table for each intervention. Where an intervention had multiple evidence
papers, quality indicators were judged collectively considering indicators met/not met
across all papers. The term 'unclear' indicates where evidence is mixed across multiple
papers (for example, when one paper does meet a criterion, and one does not). For
single evidence papers 'unclear' refers to lack of clarity in the information provided in the
paper.
20
Effect sizes
Effect sizes allow us to describe the size of the difference in outcomes between an
intervention and control/comparison group in a standardised and comparable way.
Measures of effect size vary between studies; therefore, calculated effect size allows us
to standardise and compare effects across multiple interventions. Calculated effect sizes
are only provided for statistically significant outcomes post-intervention to allow
comparison of positive impact across interventions. Effect sizes are calculated using
post-intervention descriptive data (Mean, standard deviation) comparing the intervention
group with the control or comparison group. Outcomes that lack the required descriptive
data to calculate a standard effect size using Hedges g, we report as 'unable to
calculate'. Details about effect sizes reported in evidence papers and those that we have
calculated, for all study outcomes are found in Supplementary Evidence Report.
The effect sizes we have calculated are Hedges g, a calculation which includes a
correction for small and/or uneven sample sizes between groups. We interpret them
using the Education Endowment Foundation toolkit guidance (EEF, 2023a) which
categorises effects from 'very low' to 'very high' and translates them into the number of
months' progress children gain as a result of the intervention (Table 1).
Table 1. Effect size table and corresponding months of progress and impact (using
EEF guidance)
Effect sizes (Hedges g)
Progress (months)
Impact
-0.05-0.05
0
No or very low
0.06-0.18
1-2
Low
0.19-0.44
3-5
Moderate
0.45-0.69
6-8
High
0.70-1.00
9-12
Very high
1.00+
More than 12
Very high
For each intervention we provide an effect size summary table of its highest and lowest
calculated effect size and report any outcomes where there was no effect. For highest
and lowest effect sizes we also indicate level of impact using EEF descriptions, as shown
in Table 1. Alongside these summary tables we provide a narrative overview of effect
sizes and study quality which includes whether the sample sizes of the evidence paper(s)
are small, moderate, or high. We consider a sample size to be 'small' if it includes less
than or equal to 30 children per group (intervention and control); 'moderate' if it includes
31-40 children per group; and 'large' if it includes more than or equal to 60 children per
group. These categories are based on our knowledge of typical sample sizes included in
studies reporting children's speech and language needs.
21
Levels of evidence
Levels of evidence may be represented as a hierarchy which ranks studies based on the
robustness of their design. This hierarchy is depicted in the pyramid in Figure 3 and is
adapted from Lo-Biondo-Wood, G. P. & Haber, J. (2010). Nursing research: Methods and
critical appraisal for evidence-based practice (7th Ed.) St Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier.
Systematic reviews and meta-analyses are considered the most robust evidence, and
opinion pieces and reports the least robust. All studies included in our review were either
Randomised Controlled Trials (RCT) or quasi experimental studies (QES).
Figure 3. Evidence hierarchy
Systematic
review
Randomised
control trial
Quasi-experimental
Case-control or cohort studies
Systematic review of descriptive and
qualitative studies
Single descriptive or qualitative studies
Opinion of authorities, reports from expert commitees,
narrative reviews
22
Analysis of approaches used in specialist interventions
The DfE requested that in addition to identifying specific universal and targeted
interventions that we review specialist interventions identified in the search to extract
from them any approaches or techniques which might be applied to teaching practices
within early years settings as potential universal or targeted techniques.
We found nine specialist intervention papers for stammering, 16 for speech and nine for
language within included systematic reviews. For each paper, we extracted the skills
targeted by the intervention, and author-reported intervention approaches and/or
techniques that we considered as appropriate for use within early years settings with
universal and targeted children. These were approaches that would not require
specialist-level knowledge for implementation and would not cause harm or have
negative effects on children's stammering, speech or language if delivered by non-
specialist practitioners. These approaches/techniques were then viewed across all
evidence papers to explore commonality and group together papers that reported the
same approach/technique. In total, appropriate approaches/techniques were extracted
from three of the specialist papers for stammering, five of the specialist papers for
speech and all nine for language.
23
Work package 3: Working together
To answer the research questions related to working together, a rapid review of peer-
reviewed literature and resources published in reports or doctoral theses (known as grey
literature) and a series of case studies of examples from practice were completed. The
case studies were analysed using qualitative framework analysis based on the theoretical
domains framework (TDF) (Cane et al., 2012) and mapped onto the COM-B model
(Michie et al., 2011).
Research questions
What examples are there of different models of collaboration between early years
settings with other professionals for identifying and providing support for children's
stammering, speech and language needs. These other professionals include:
SLTs; Health Visitors (HVs); Educational Psychologists (EPs); and parents and
caregivers
What recommendations can be made about optimal components and
characteristics of collaboration between early years settings, other professionals
and parents and carers to support identification and intervention for children's
stammering, speech and language needs.
Rapid literature review methods
The remit for this rapid review of literature about working together with early years
settings was to conduct a database search for peer-reviewed evidence published in the
last 10 years, and a search of grey literature, including doctoral thesis and reports using
the same parameters:
All sources were described with respect to the evidence/theoretical base
Target cohort characteristics
Evidence of knowledge exchange
Training content and availability
Assessment and intervention content
Effectiveness
Evidence of sustainability/normalisation
Flexibility and tracking through universal, targeted, specialist intervention
pathways
24
As this is a rapid review, it cannot be guaranteed that a fully comprehensive list of
literature about working together has been generated.
Search strategy
Peer reviewed articles
One of the issues with conducting a rapid review of the literature on 'working together'
was the lack of consistent terminology used to describe it or what is meant by it.
Therefore, we had to make decisions regarding the search terms used but are cognisant
of the fact that this will have resulted in many studies and papers not appearing in the
results of the database or grey literature searches. Endeavouring to mitigate this was
addressed by adding filters for synonyms and mapped terms. Advice was taken from
Newcastle University Library specialist librarian to ensure we were searching all available
and relevant databases for both peer reviewed and grey literature.
Five key databases were identified to conduct the rapid review including: The British
Education Index (EBSCO), SCOPUS, Medline (OVID), Web of Science and ERIC
(Educational Information Resources Centre).
Following identification of search terms, searches took place firstly with all terms
comprising age, setting, type of need, pathway, and collaboration (see Appendix C:
Working together search terms). With few results being returned, the searches were run
again with terms Universal* OR targeted* OR specialist* removed. An additional series of
searches was also run that included specified partners. The searches were limited to the
time frame of January 1st, 2014, to the end of February 2024.
The results of searches for each separate database were combined and duplicates
removed. The abstracts were read and exclusion criteria applied (age range of children
(0-5); focus on collaboration; focus on speech, language and communication;
involvement of early years practitioners and settings). The results from each database
were combined and duplicates removed. Non-UK studies were removed. This resulted in
15 studies.
All studies were read in full and exclusion criteria applied, resulting in five papers being
included in the rapid review. The reference lists of these papers were also followed up
and exclusion criteria applied, resulting in a further four results. Additional results were
then also read in full. A total of nine papers were included in the rapid review on working
together (Figure 4).
25
Figure 4. Flow chart for the working together search of peer-reviewed articles
EBSCO
Scopus
Medline
Web of
ERIC
Search 1: using terms 1-5
n=13
n=8
n=44
Science
(EBSCO)
n=211
n= 77
Search: 2 using terms 1-3 plus
EBSCO
Scopus
Medline
Web of
ERIC
5
n=130
n=42
n=1059
Science
(EBSCO)
n=1511
n= 10
Searches 1 and 2 combined,
EBSCO
Scopus
Medline
Web of
ERIC
duplicates removed, each
n=13
n=4
n=4
Science
(EBSCO)
abstract was read and the
n=29
n= 10
exclusion criteria applied
Results combined n= 60
Duplicates and non-UK studies
Non-UK studies removed n=
excluded
Duplicates removed n=56
15
Full texts read and exclusion
criteria applied n= 5
Total results N=9
References followed up and
where inclusion criteria applied
were read in full: n= 4
Grey literature, thesis and websites
Three search engines/databases were identified to conduct the grey literature rapid
review including: (1) Google Advanced Search; (2) The Bielefeld Academy Search
Engine (BASE), an open access repository containing 100 million documents; and (3)
ProQuest TM Dissertations & Theses Citation Index.
The British Library online search facility for theses was unavailable due to a Cyber
incident in October 2023.
Drawing on the experience of the academic database searches, the search terms were
limited to in order to have a broader scope and obtain more potential results. Additional
filters were added, based on the exclusion criteria used in the academic database
search.
26
The filters applied for the search engine and database searches were as follows:
Google advanced search:
Contain all of these words (speech, language, communication, early years,
collaboration, partnership)
Language: English
Region: UK
Last update: anytime
Terms appearing: in the whole page
File type: any
BASE:
Filter: Time: 2014-2024
Filter: UK
Filter: text
Filter: subject: communication
Filter: Language: English
ProQuest™ Dissertations & Theses Citation Index:
Filter: Time: 2014-01-01 to 2024-06-11
Filter: Included thesis and dissertations in England
Following this search of Google (websites, links); BASE and ProQuest (titles and
descriptions) the results were followed up and inclusion criteria applied. This resulted in
four relevant sources. Knowledge of a relevant thesis was also followed up. This yielded
a total of five sources (Figure 5).
27
Figure 5. Flow chart for the working together search of grey literature articles
ProQuest TM
BASE (Bielefeld
Dissertations &
Search 1: using search terms and
Google Advanced
Academy Search
Theses Citation
filters applied
search n=281
Engine) n=737
Index n=12
ProQuest TM
BASE (Bielefeld
Dissertations &
Search 2: Exclusion criteria applied
Google Advanced
Academy Search
Theses Citation
search n=10
Engine) n=0
Index n=0
Texts, reports, websites read and
followed-up n=4
Total Results n=5
Research team knowledge of
relevant thesis n=1
Case study methods
A range of case studies of good practice in working together to support children with
speech and language needs in the early years were identified and examined in order to
consider how different approaches can be or are effective. Each locality has different
needs, the services are organised differently and the professionals that come together
bring different knowledge and expertise. Each approach is unique, yet there are
commonalities across them. Our goal was to describe good practices such that localities
that aim to develop their own model of working together may find that one of the
examples will meet their need or that parts from each example will best fit their context.
Additionally, we aimed to identify cross-cutting themes of best practice to inform service
and policy development.
Structured interviews were used to collect data which were then analysed using the
Theoretical Domains Framework (Cane et al., 2012). This is a model from behavioural
sciences that has been validated for use in the identification of barriers and enablers in
contexts where conditions are identified and interventions implemented (Cane et al.,
2012). The TDF maps onto the Capability, Opportunity, Motivation-Behaviour (COM-B)
Model (Michie et al., 2011) which can be used to help us better understand the
components that contribute in positive or negative ways to the desired outcomes.
28
Ethics
Ethical approval was given by the Newcastle University Ethics Committee. Information
and consent documents were emailed to participants for completion.
Participants
Participants were identified through the research team's existing professional networks
and from a list of contacts provided by the DfE. We aimed to recruit participants from
different regions and with different models of working together. Emails were sent to the
named contact explaining the scope and purpose of the work and they were asked if they
thought their work aligned with our aims. From this we recruited four speech and
language therapy services and one Academy Trust whose early years settings worked
together with one of the speech and language therapy services. Three of the speech and
language therapy services recruited early years settings whom they thought were typical
of their working together model. EPs and an associated settings were later recruited
through personal contacts. Despite multiple attempts we were unable to recruit a Health
Visitor.
Procedure
Questionnaires for use in online interviews with representatives from the different
organisations were devised to address the research questions. Modified versions of the
same questions were developed for use with SLTs, HVs, EPs, and managers of early
years settings. The introductory email for early years practitioners is in Appendix D: Case
study email template. The questions used for the early years setting interviews are in
Appendix E: Early years settings interview questions.
The interview questions were emailed in advance to the participants so they could
prepare their responses. In addition, they were asked to provide the following information
by email:
Name of organisation
Title of working together/partnership/collaborative work (if there is one)
Geographic location
Type of working together (collaboration, partnership etc.)
Who is working together (please just provide job titles involved e.g. teaching
assistant, head teacher, SLT, parent etc.)
Who leads the working together (please provide job titles and organisation names)
How children's progress is tracked/measured
29
Types of interventions implemented by early years practitioners
What training do early years practitioners receive to prepare them for
implementing interventions for children with SLCN? [for early years settings only]
What training do specialist professionals receive to support collaborative or
partnership working with early years settings? [for SLTs, EPs, HVs only]
If you have online information about your work, please provide the link
Interviews between the participant and research associate took place online using Zoom.
With permission, the interviews were recorded and automatically transcribed using the
routine Zoom software. The transcripts were checked and edited for accuracy by the
research associate.
Data analysis
The interview transcripts were analysed using the TDF domains by Thomas.
Approximately 20% of the analyses were checked by H. Stringer (Newcastle team
member). No classification was changed at this stage. However, as the case studies
were populated some of the information moved categories to support clarity and follow
themes within the case study, e.g. goal setting occurred in different categories depending
upon the process in the working together.
30
Appendices
Appendix A: Definitions of key psychometric constructs
Psychometric term
Definition
Concurrent validity
The degree to which a measure aligns with another well-
established measure which is often a standardised "gold
standard" test.
Construct validity
The theoretical basis of the measure and ability to
differentiate between groups with known differences in ability
e.g. with age. Does the test measure the concept it is
intended to measure.
Correlation
A statistical test measuring the degree to which two sets of
scores are related to one another such that if one increases
then the other also increases or vice versa.
Cronbach's alpha
A statistical test measuring agreement between scores.
Cross-cultural validity
The degree to which a measure is applicable across cultures
and/or has been adapted for use in other languages.
Discriminant validity
Verifies that measures or components of measures that
should not be related are not related.
Face validity
A qualitative, subjective judgement by those who use the tool
as to whether it measures what it aims to measure.
Internal Consistency
Assesses how well the different items within the
measurement tool measure the same underlying construct.
Inter-rater reliability
Assesses the degree to which two different users of the
measure or raters of the child's performance agree with one
another.
Intra-class Correlation
A statistical test can measure inter-rater reliability and test-
retest reliability.
Normative sample
The sample of children used to develop the norms for a given
measure. That is to generate the average range of scores for
a given tool and/or the age when a certain behaviour or skill
would be expected to have developed.
31
Psychometric term
Definition
Reliability
The consistency and precision of the measure. This can
include consideration of consistency over time, between
different people using the measure and across items within
the measure. Lack of reliability introduced error into the
measurement process reducing the confidence we can have
that it is providing a true representation of the child's abilities.
Sensitivity
The proportion of people with a given condition that have a
positive result on a screening test. A test that is 100%
sensitive means all individuals with a given condition are
correctly identified i.e. there are no false negatives (i.e.
people who have the condition but are not identified by the
test). As sensitivity increases specificity decreases.
Specificity
The proportion of people without a given condition that have a
negative result on a screening test. A test that is 100%
specific means all individuals who do not have a given
condition are correctly identified i.e. there are no false
positives. As specificity increases, sensitivity decreases.
Usability
A qualitative judgement regarding how feasible, practical and
easy a tool is for practitioners to use.
Validity
The degree to which an assessment tool measures the
construct it is designed to be measured. There are multiple
types of validity.
32
Appendix B: Criteria for psychometric quality judgements
Criteria
Quality judgement
Normative sample size
Tertiles were created of the sample sizes used for
standardization in the included assessment tools, where
tertile 1 was low (0-65); tertile 2 was moderate (606-
1516); and tertile 3 was good to excellent (1517-
350,000).
Normative sample
No quality rating given. A qualitative judgement as to
representativeness
whether developers consider Geography,
socioeconomic status, age and sex in sampling
methods.
Usability
No quality rating given. A qualitative judgement
regarding how feasible, practical and easy a tool is for
practitioners to use.
Sensitivity and specificity
Categories of quality adapted from (Law et al., 2000,
Michael et al., 2013) where good to excellent was
greater than 80% in both sensitivity and specificity;
moderate was when the sum across sensitivity and
specificity greater or equal to 150; and low, when the
sum across sensitivity and specificity was below 150.
Concurrent validity
Measured using correlations between measure and
"gold standard". Higher correlations equalled higher
concurrent validity. The categories of correlation
coefficient adapted from (Portney and Watkin, 2007)
where, less than 0.25 was small, between 0.25 and 0.5
was moderate; between 0.5 and 0.75 was good; and
above 0.75 was excellent.
Discriminant validity
Measured using correlations between aspects of
measure measuring differing domains and/or
measurement tools assessing differing constructs.
Lower correlations equalled higher discriminant validity.
Face validity
No quality rating given. A qualitative judgement by those
who use the tool as to whether it measures what it aims
to measure.
33
Criteria
Quality judgement
Internal Consistency
Measured using Cronbach's alpha. Categories of quality
in Cronbach's alpha (Cronbach, 1951) where less than
or equal to 0.5 was unacceptable (low); between 0.5
and 0.6 was poor (low); between 0.6 and 0.7 was
questionable (low); between 0.7 and 0.8 was acceptable
(moderate); between 0.8 and 0.9 was good; and above
0.9 was excellent.
Test-retest reliability
Measured using Intra Class Correlations (ICC).
Categories of quality in ICC (Koo and Li, 2016) where
less than 0.5 was poor reliability; 0.5 to 0.75 indicated
moderated reliability; 0.75 to 0.9 was good reliability;
and above 0.9 was excellent reliability.
Inter-rater reliability
Measured using Intra Class Correlations (ICC).
Categories of quality in ICC (Koo and Li, 2016) where
less than 0.5 was poor reliability; 0.5 to 0.75 indicated
moderated reliability; 0.75 to 0.9 was good reliability;
and above 0.9 was excellent reliability.
34
Appendix C: Working together search terms
Criteria
Terms
Age
Child* OR boy* OR girl*
Setting
Preschool* OR nursery* OR reception* OR "Early Years"
Type of need
Phon* OR "speech, language and communication needs"
OR SLCN* OR Language* OR speech* OR "speech
needs" OR "speech sound disorders" OR SSD* OR
dysfluency* OR stuttering* OR stammering* OR fluency*
OR semantics* OR vocabulary* OR syntax* OR
grammar* OR morphology* "expressive language" OR
"receptive language"
Pathway
Universal* OR targeted* OR specialist*
Collaboration
Collaboration* OR partnership* OR co-practice* OR
multidisciplinary* OR "knowledge exchange" OR training*
Speech, language and
"Speech and language therapist" OR "speech therapist"
communication partners
OR "speech pathologist" OR "speech language
pathologist" OR "speech AND language pathologist" OR
"health visitor" OR HV* OR "Educational Psychologist"
OR "Ed Psych" OR EP*
School partners
Teachers* OR practitioners* OR "Teaching assistant" OR
TA*
Parent/carers
Parents* OR care*
35
Appendix D: Case study email template
Dear [Name]
Thank you for agreeing to be interviewed about the way you provide support to children
with speech, language and communication needs (SLCN) in the Early Years (EY). We
are compiling case studies for the Department of Education National Standards Unit
about how early years settings and early years practitioners work with parents/caregivers
and specialist professionals to effectively support EY children with SLCN. In each case
we are interviewing representatives of at least two organisations so that we can get a
more rounded view of the process and why it is successful.
To save time at the interview we request that you email some background information
about how EY children with SLCN are supported. Please let us have your answers to the
background questions a few days before the interview.
The questions that we will ask in the interview are attached to this email. Please read
them and if necessary, discuss them with others in your organisation.
So that we are all talking about the same concepts when we are considering working
together across organisations, we are using the following definitions:
Collaboration is when two or more people with different skills and knowledge work
effectively with each other to complete the same piece of work or to achieve the same
goal. The work evolves as each person contributes. The arrangement can be informal,
and collaborators may change during the work as they start or finish their contribution.
Collaborators may not have equal status in the relationship and may not bear the same
responsibility for completing the work or achieving the goal.
Partnership is a more formal arrangement than a collaboration. There is a high level of
commitment and an expectation that the partnership will be long lasting. Partners share
risk and responsibility and contribute similar levels of expertise and resource.
Partnerships may facilitate several different collaborations and have several projects or
pieces of work at the same time.
Parallel working is when the different professionals work separately with the same
child/children, each contributing their specialist knowledge. Each professional bears
responsibility individually to achieve their goals, which may have been set with no
consultation with other professionals. Parents/caregivers may be more involved with
each professional in this model. Information about progress is reported from the
professional to the educational setting, other involved professionals and parent/caregiver.
There may or may not be a two-way flow of information.
36
Appendix E: Early years settings interview questions
1. Please tell me about the way you work together with other services (SLT, HV, EP)
and parents/caregivers to support children in your setting with SLCN. Please think
about how the partnership with other professionals (SLT, HV, EP) started; what
you think helps the partnership to last over time (sustainability); how senior
leaders support the working together (e.g. is there a strategic plan? Do you have a
strategy document?); the training available to your staff that supports the work with
children with SLCN, (who provides it and who funds it); which areas of speech,
language and communication you support with universal or targeted interventions;
the interventions you use (e.g. Talk Boost, Phonological Awareness, Language
Steps etc.); how resources are managed, including the materials needed for the
interventions, the allocated staff time and physical space for the
interventions/support; if you fund any of the support from specialists e.g. buying in
extra speech and language therapy; how you make best use of the free NHS
service that children are entitled to.
2. How do you know that the way you work together with other services (SLT, HV,
EP) and parents/caregivers is achieving its goal of successfully supporting
children with SLCN in your setting? Please think about how the attainment profile
of the children has changed; how the number and nature of referrals to speech
and language therapy have changed since you have been working together in this
way; what aspects of the working together you think are most important in
contributing to its success; if all children benefit equally or do some benefit more,
(e.g. children from poorer backgrounds, bilingual children with SLCN in all their
languages, boys etc.); how parents/caregivers are involved; how is information
about individual children shared across organisations/with parents/caregivers and
how are decisions about children made.
3. What were the biggest barriers/major concerns you had to overcome to establish
successful working together? Please think about how these issues were identified;
who worked together to overcome them.
4. How has the nature of the working together changed over time? Please think
about how sustainable it is even if key personnel leave or change roles within the
organisation; how you link up with others to share good practice; if your staff,
especially teaching assistants, have opportunity to support and learn from each
other in relation to the working together to support children with SLCN; If you think
this way of working is now just normal for you?
5. What advice would you give to other EY settings who would like to change their
practice to better support children with SLCN in the early years? Please think
about the important things you have learnt along the way; whose strategic support
37
you need e.g. executive managers/officers, commissioners; how you get staff at all
levels of the organisation on board; how you get parents/caregivers on board?
38
References
ASUNTA, P., VIHOLAINEN, H., AHONEN, T. & RINTALA, P. 2019. Psychometric
properties of observational tools for identifying motor difficulties - a systematic
review. BMC Pediatr, 19, 322.
BAKER, S., HARDING, S., HOLME, C., LEWIS, R., SEIFERT, M. & WREN, Y. 2022.
Review of early language screening suitable for children in wales from birth to 5
years.
CANE, J., O'CONNOR, D. & MICHIE, S. 2012. Validation of the theoretical domains
framework for use in behaviour change and implementation research.
Implementation Science, 7.
CAPPELLERI, J. C., JASON LUNDY, J. & HAYS, R. D. 2014. Overview of classical test
theory and item response theory for the quantitative assessment of items in
developing patient-reported outcomes measures. Clin Ther, 36, 648-62.
CIRRIN, F. M. & GILLAM, R. B. 2008. Language Intervention Practices for School-Age
Children with Spoken Language Disorders: A Systematic Review. Language,
Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 39, S110-S137.
CRONBACH, L. J. 1951. Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests.
Psychometrika, 16, 297-334.
DURÁN, L. K., HARTZHEIM, D., LUND, E. M., SIMONSMEIER, V. & KOHLMEIER, T. L.
2016. Bilingual and home language interventions with young dual language
learners: A research synthesis. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in
Schools, 47, 347-371.
FELTNER, C., WALLACE, I. F., NOWELL, S. W., ORR, C. J., RAFFA, B., MIDDLETON,
J. C., VAUGHAN, J., BAKER, C., CHOU, R. & KAHWATI, L. 2024. Screening for
Speech and Language Delay and Disorders in Children 5 Years or Younger:
Evidence Report and Systematic Review for the US Preventive Services Task
Force. JAMA, 331, 335-351.
GRANT, M. J. & BOOTH, A. 2009. A typology of reviews: an analysis of 14 review types
and associated methodologies. Health Information & Libraries Journal, 26, 91-108.
HIGGINS, S., KOKOTSAKI, D. & COE, R. 2012. The teaching and learning toolkit.
Education Endowment Foundation and Sutton Trust.
39
HOFFMANN, T. C., GLASZIOU, P. P., BOUTRON, I., MILNE, R., PERERA, R., MOHER,
D., ALTMAN, D. G., BARBOUR, V., MACDONALD, H., JOHNSTON, M., LAMB, S.
E.,
DIXON-WOODS, M., MCCULLOCH, P., WYATT, J. C., CHAN, A.-W. & MICHIE, S. 2014.
Better reporting of interventions: template for intervention description and replication
(TIDieR) checklist and guide. BMJ: British Medical Journal, 348, g1687.
JABRAYILOV, R., EMONS, W. H. M. & SIJTSMA, K. 2016. Comparison of Classical Test
Theory and Item Response Theory in Individual Change Assessment. Appl Psychol
Meas, 40, 559-572.
KOO, T. K. & LI, M. Y. 2016. A Guideline of Selecting and Reporting Intraclass
Correlation Coefficients for Reliability Research. Journal of Chiropractic Medicine,
15, 155-163.
LAW, J., BOYLE, J., HARRIS, F., HARKNESS, A. & NYE, C. 2000. The feasibility of
universal screening for primary speech and language delay: Findings from a
systematic review of the literature Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology,
42, 190-200.
MICHAEL, P., GREG, F. & MICHAEL, W. 2013. Principles for high-quality, high-value
testing. Evidence Based Medicine, 18, 5.
MICHIE, S., VAN STRALEN, M. M. & WEST, R. 2011. The behaviour change wheel: a
new method for characterising and designing behaviour change interventions.
Implementation Science, 6.
PORTNEY, L. G. & WATKIN, M. P. 2007. Foundations of clinical research: Applications
to practice, New Jersey, Prentice Hall.
SHOBBROOK, K., YOUNG, P., BEEKE, S. & BEST, W. 2024. Making oral
comprehension interventions TIDieR: A narrative synthesis of interventions
improving comprehension in children from 1 to 5 years with language difficulties.
International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders.
Systematic reviews identified in our review
BAKER, E., WILLIAMS, A. L., MCLEOD, S. & MCCAULEY, R. 2018. Elements of
Phonological Interventions for Children with Speech Sound Disorders: The
Development of a Taxonomy. Am J Speech Lang Pathol, 27, 906-935.
BAXTER, S., JOHNSON, M., BLANK, L., CANTRELL, A., BRUMFITT, S., ENDERBY, P.
& GOYDER, E. 2015. The state of the art in non-pharmacological interventions for
40
developmental stuttering. Part 1: a systematic review of effectiveness. Int J Lang
Commun Disord, 50, 676-718.
BELLON-HARN, M. L., MORRIS, L. R., MANCHAIAH, V. & HARN, W. E. 2020. Use of
Videos and Digital Media in Parent-implemented Interventions for Parents of
Children with Primary Speech Sound And/or Language Disorders: A Scoping
Review. J Child Fam Stud, 29, 3596-3608.
BRIGNELL, A., KRAHE, M., DOWNES, M., KEFALIANOS, E., REILLY, S. & MORGAN,
A. 2021. Interventions for children and adolescents who stutter: A systematic
review, meta-analysis, and evidence map. J Fluency Disord, 70, 105843.
CROWE, K., CUERVO, S., GUIBERSON, M. & WASHINGTON, K. N. 2021. A
Systematic Review of Interventions for Multilingual Preschoolers with Speech and
Language Difficulties. J Speech Lang Hear Res, 64, 4413-4438.
DAVIDOW, J. H., ZAROOGIAN, L. & GARCIA-BARRERA, M. A. 2016. Strategies for
Teachers to Manage Stuttering in the Classroom: A Call for Research. Lang Speech
Hear Serv Sch, 47, 283-296.
DEVENEY, S. L. & PETERKIN, K. 2022. Facing a Clinical Challenge: Limited Empirical
Support for Toddler Speech Sound Production Intervention Approaches. Lang
Speech Hear Serv Sch, 53, 659-674.
DOBINSON, K. L. & DOCKRELL, J. E. 2021. Universal strategies for the improvement of
expressive language skills in the primary classroom: A systematic review. First
Language, 41, 527-554.
DONOLATO, E., TOFFALINI, E., ROGDE, K., NORDAHL-HANSEN, A., LERVÃG, A.,
NORBURY, C. & MELBY-LERVÂG, M. 2023. Oral language interventions can
improve language outcomes in children with neurodevelopmental disorders: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Campbell Syst Rev, 19, e1368.
DOWDALL, N., MELENDEZ-TORRES, G. J., MURRAY, L., GARDNER, F., HARTFORD,
L. & COOPER, P. J. 2020. Shared Picture Book Reading Interventions for Child
Language Development: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Child Dev, 91,
e383-e399.
FAVOT, K., CARTER, M. & STEPHENSON, J. 2021. The effects of oral narrative
intervention on the narratives of children with language disorder: A systematic
literature review. Journal of Developmental and Physical Disabilities, 33, 489-536.
GOLDFELD, S., BEATSON, R., WATTS, A., SNOW, P., GOLD, L., LE, H. N. D
EADIE, P. 2022. Tier 2 oral language and early reading interventions for preschool
41
to grade 2 children: a restricted systematic review. Australian Journal of Learning
Difficulties, 27, 65-113.
GREENWOOD, C. R., SCHNITZ, A. G., CARTA, J. J., WALLISCH, A. & IRVIN, D. W.
2020. A systematic review of language intervention research with low-income
families: A word gap prevention perspective. Early Childhood Research Quarterly,
50, 230-245.
HEIDLAGE, J. K. 2019. The effects of parent-implemented language interventions on
child linguistic outcomes: A meta-analysis. Early Childhood Resaearch Quarterly,
50, 1-18.
HOFSLUNDSENGEN, H., KIRMESS, M., GUTTORMSEN, L. S., NAESS, K. B. &
KEFALIANOS, E. 2022. Systematic review of implementation quality of non-
pharmacological stuttering intervention trials for children and adolescents. J Fluency
Disord, 71, 105884.
JENSEN DE LÓPEZ, K. M., KRALJEVIĆ, J. K. & STRUNTZE, E. L. B. 2022. Efficacy,
model of delivery, intensity and targets of pragmatic interventions for children with
developmental language disorder: A systematic review. Int J Lang Commun Disord,
57, 764-781.
LAIHO, A., ELOVAARA, H., KAISAMATTI, K., LUHTALAMPI, K., TALASKIVI, L., POHJA,
S.
VUORIO, E. 2022. Stuttering interventions for children, adolescents, and
adults: a systematic review as a part of clinical guidelines. J Commun Disord, 99,
106242.
LARSON, A. L., CYCYK, L. M., CARTA, J.J., HAMMER, C. S., BARALT, M.,
UCHIKOSHI, Y. WOOD, C. 2020. A systematic review of language-focused
interventions for young children from culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 50, 157-178.
LAW, J. & CHARLTON, J. 2022. Interventions to Promote Language Development in
Typical and Atypical Populations. In: LAW, J., REILLY, S. & MCKEAN, C. (eds.)
Language Development: Individual Differences in a Social Context. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
LAW, J., CHARLTON, J., MCKEAN, C., BEYER, F., FERNANDEZ-GARCIA, C.,
MASHAYEKHI, A. & RUSH, R. 2018. Parent-child reading to improve language
development and school readiness: A systematic review and meta-analysis.:
Newcastle University and Queen Margaret University.
42
LEE, A. S. & GIBBON, F. E. 2015. Non-speech oral motor treatment for children with
developmental speech sound disorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 2015,
Cd009383.
LEVICKIS, P., PATEL, P., MCKEAN, C., SMITH, J., HACKWORTH, N., LAW, J. &
REILLY, S. 2022. A Review of Interventions to Promote Language Development in
Early Childhood. In: LAW, J., REILLY, S. & MCKEAN, C. (eds.) Language
Development: Individual Differences in a Social Context. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
MARKUSSEN-BROWN J., JUHL, C. B., PIASTA, S. B., BLESES, D., HØJEN, A. &
JUSTICE, L. M. 2017. The effects of language- and literacy-focused professional
development on early educators and children: A best-evidence meta-analysis. Early
Childhood Research Quarterly, 38, 97-115.
NAIR, V. K. K., CLARK, G. T., SIYAMBALAPITIYA, S. & REUTERSKIÖLD, C. 2023.
Language intervention in bilingual children with developmental language disorder: A
systematic review. International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders,
58, 576-600.
NOBLE, C., SALA, G., PETER, M., LINGWOOD, J., ROWLAND, C., GOBET, F. & PINE,
J. 2019. The impact of shared book reading on children's language skills: A meta-
analysis. Educational Research Review, 28, 100290.
OXLEY, E. & DE CAT, C. 2018. A systematic review of language and literacy
interventions in children and adolescents with English as an additional language
(EAL). The Language Learning Journal, 49, 265 - 287.
PARRY, C.-R. L., KUMAR, S. & GALLINGANE, C. 2024. Integration of Tablets in
Phonological Awareness and Phonics Instruction: A Systematic Review. Journal of
Research in Childhood Education, 38, 559-576.
PICO, D. L., HESSLING PRAHL, A., BIEL, C. H., PETERSON, A. K., BIEL, E. J.,
WOODS, C. & CONTESSE, V.A. 2021. Interventions Designed to Improve
Narrative Language in School-Age Children: A Systematic Review with Meta-
Analyses. Lang Speech Hear Serv Sch, 52, 1109-1126.
RINALDI, S., CASELLI, M. C., COFELICE, V., D'AMICO, S., DE CAGNO, A. G., DELLA
CORTE,
G., ZOCCOLOTTI, P. 2021. Efficacy of the Treatment of
Developmental Language Disorder: A Systematic Review. Brain Sci, 11.
RODGERS, L., HARDING, S., REES, R. & CLARKE, M. T. 2022. Interventions for pre-
school children with co-occurring phonological speech sound disorder and
43
expressive language difficulties: A scoping review. Int J Lang Commun Disord, 57,
700-716.
SEDGWICK, A. & STOTHARD, J. 2018. A systematic review of school-based,
mainstream, oral language interventions for key stage 1 children. Support for
Learning, 33, 360-387.
SHOBBROOK, K., YOUNG, P., BEEKE, S. & BEST, W. 2024. Making oral
comprehension interventions TIDieR: A narrative synthesis of interventions
improving comprehension in children from 1 to 5 years with language difficulties. Int
J Lang Commun Disord, 59, 1351-1370.
SJØSTRAND, Å., KEFALIANOS, E., HOFSLUNDSENGEN, H., GUTTORMSEN, L. S.,
KIRMESS, M., LERVÃG, A.,
BOTTEGAARD NAESS, K.A. 2021. Non-
pharmacological interventions for stuttering in children six years and younger.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 9, Cd013489.
SUGDEN, E., LLOYD, S., LAM, J. & CLELAND, J. 2019. Systematic review of ultrasound
visual biofeedback in intervention for speech sound disorders. Int J Lang Commun
Disord, 54, 705-728.
TARVAINEN, S., STOLT, S. & LAUNONEN, K. 2020. Oral language comprehension
interventions in 1-8-year-old children with language disorders or difficulties: A
systematic scoping review. Autism Dev Lang Impair, 5, 2396941520946999.
WALKER, D., SEPULVEDA, S. J., HOFF, E., ROWE, M. L., SCHWARTZ, I. S., DALE, P.
S
BIGELOW, K. M. 2020. Language intervention research in early childhood
care and education: A systematic survey of the literature. Early Childhood Research
Quarterly, 50, 68-85.
WREN, Y., HARDING, S., GOLDBART, J. & ROULSTONE, S. 2018. A systematic review
and classification of interventions for speech-sound disorder in preschool children.
Int J Lang Commun Disord, 53, 446-467.
44
Department
for Education
© Department for Education Copyright 2025
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0,
except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit
nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3
Where we have identified any third-party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
Reference: RR1554
ISBN: 978-1-83870-706-4
For any enquiries regarding this publication, contact www.gov.uk/contact-dfe.
This document is available for download at www.gov.uk/government/publications.
45
