Department
for Education
Supporting pupils at
school with medical
conditions
Statutory guidance for governing bodies
of maintained schools and proprietors of
academies in England
December 2015
Contents
Summary
3
About this guidance
3
Expiry or review date
3
What legislation is this guidance issued under?
3
Who is this guidance for?
4
Key points
4
Introduction
5
The role of governing bodies, proprietors and management committees
7
Developing the school's policy
8
Other issues for consideration
25
Further sources of information
26
Other safeguarding legislation
26
Other relevant legislation
27
Associated resources
27
Annex A: Model process for developing individual healthcare plans
28
2
Summary
About this guidance
This document contains both statutory guidance and non-statutory advice. The non-
statutory advice is presented in text boxes.
The statutory guidance applies to any 'appropriate authority' as defined in section 100 of
the Children and Families Act 2014. That means governing bodies in the case of
maintained schools, proprietors in the case of academies and management committees
in the case of pupil referral units (PRUs).
'Appropriate authorities' must have regard to 1 this guidance when carrying out their
statutory duty to make arrangements to support pupils at school with medical conditions.
The guidance also applies to activities taking place off-site as part of normal educational
activities. In this document, references to schools are taken to include academies and
PRUs and references to governing bodies include proprietors in academies and
management committees of PRUs. Further advice, where provided, is based on good
practice but is non-statutory.
Early years settings should continue to apply the Statutory Framework for the Early
Years Foundation Stage 2
This document replaces an earlier version of this guidance published in September 2014.
Previous guidance on managing medicines in schools and early years settings was
published in March 2005.
Expiry or review date
This guidance will be kept under review and updated as necessary.
What legislation is this guidance issued under?
Section 100 of the Children and Families Act 2014 places a duty on governing bodies of
maintained schools, proprietors of academies and management committees of PRUs to
make arrangements for supporting pupils at their school with medical conditions.
1
This means to take account of the guidance and to carefully consider it. Having done so, there would
need to be a good reason to justify not complying with it.
2 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/early-years-foundation-stage-framework-2
3
In meeting the duty, the governing body, proprietor or management committee must have
regard to guidance issued by the Secretary of State under this section. This guidance
came into force on 1 September 2014.
Who is this guidance for?
This statutory guidance applies to:
governing bodies of maintained schools (excluding maintained nursery schools)
management committees of PRUs
proprietors of academies, including alternative provision academies (but not
including 16-19 academies)
This guidance is also provided to assist and guide:
schools, academies (including alternative provision academies) and PRUs
local authorities
clinical commissioning groups (CCGs), NHS England
anyone who has an interest in promoting the wellbeing and academic attainment
of children with medical conditions, including alternative provision, e.g.
independent schools
parents/carers³ and pupils
health service providers
Key points
Pupils at school with medical conditions should be properly supported so that they
have full access to education, including school trips and physical education.
Governing bodies must ensure that arrangements are in place in schools to
support pupils at school with medical conditions.
Governing bodies should ensure that school leaders consult health and social care
professionals, pupils and parents to ensure that the needs of children with medical
conditions are properly understood and effectively supported.
3 All further references to a parent or parents also includes a carer or carers
4
Introduction
1.
On 1 September 2014 a new duty came into force for governing bodies to make
arrangements to support pupils at school with medical conditions. The statutory guidance
in this document is intended to help governing bodies meet their legal responsibilities and
sets out the arrangements they will be expected to make, based on good practice. The
aim is to ensure that all children with medical conditions, in terms of both physical and
mental health, are properly supported in school so that they can play a full and active role
in school life, remain healthy and achieve their academic potential.
2.
Parents of children with medical conditions are often concerned that their child's
health will deteriorate when they attend school. This is because pupils with long-term and
complex medical conditions may require ongoing support, medicines or care while at
school to help them manage their condition and keep them well. Others may require
monitoring and interventions in emergency circumstances. It is also the case that
children's health needs may change over time, in ways that cannot always be predicted,
sometimes resulting in extended absences. It is therefore important that parents feel
confident that schools will provide effective support for their child's medical condition and
that pupils feel safe. In making decisions about the support they provide, schools should
establish relationships with relevant local health services to help them. It is crucial that
schools receive and fully consider advice from healthcare professionals and listen to and
value the views of parents and pupils.
3.
In addition to the educational impacts, there are social and emotional implications
associated with medical conditions. Children may be self-conscious about their condition
and some may be bullied or develop emotional disorders such as anxiety or depression
around their medical condition. In particular, long-term absences due to health problems
affect children's educational attainment, impact on their ability to integrate with their
peers and affect their general wellbeing and emotional health. Reintegration back into
school should be properly supported so that children with medical conditions fully engage
with learning and do not fall behind when they are unable to attend. Short-term and
frequent absences, including those for appointments connected with a pupil's medical
condition (which can often be lengthy), also need to be effectively managed and
appropriate support put in place to limit the impact on the child's educational attainment
and emotional and general wellbeing.
Some children with medical conditions may be considered to be disabled under the
definition set out in the Equality Act 2010. Where this is the case governing bodies must
comply with their duties under that Act. Some may also have special educational needs
(SEN) and may have a statement, or Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan which
brings together health and social care needs, as well as their special educational
provision. For children with SEN, this guidance should be read in conjunction with the
5
Special educational needs and disability (SEND) code of practice⁴ The Special
educational needs and disability code of practice explains the duties of local authorities,
health bodies, schools and colleges to provide for those with special educational needs
under part 3 of the Children and Families Act 2014. For pupils who have medical
conditions that require EHC plans, compliance with the SEND code of practice will
ensure compliance with this guidance with respect to those children.
4
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-code-of-practice-0-to-25
6
The role of governing bodies, proprietors and
management committees
4.
In meeting the duty to make arrangements to support pupils with medical
conditions, functions can be conferred on a governor, a headteacher, a committee or
other member of staff as appropriate. Help and co-operation can also be enlisted from
other appropriate persons. We expect that an approach to meeting the duty will be taken
in light of the statutory guidance. This will inform the school and others about what needs
to be done in terms of implementation. However, the governing body, proprietor or
management committee remains legally responsible and accountable for fulfilling its
statutory duty.
5.
The governing body⁵ must ensure that arrangements are in place to support pupils
with medical conditions. In doing so it should ensure that such children can access and
enjoy the same opportunities at school as any other child.
Further advice:
Schools, local authorities, health professionals, commissioners and other support
services should work together to ensure that children with medical conditions receive
a full education. In some cases this will require flexibility and involve, for example,
programmes of study that rely on part-time attendance at school in combination with
alternative provision arranged by the local authority⁶. Consideration may also be
given to how children will be reintegrated back into school after periods of absence.
6.
In making their arrangements, governing bodies should take into account that
many of the medical conditions that require support at school will affect quality of life and
may be life-threatening. Some will be more obvious than others. Governing bodies
should therefore ensure that the focus is on the needs of each individual child and how
their medical condition impacts on their school life.
7.
The governing body should ensure that its arrangements give parents and pupils
confidence in the school's ability to provide effective support for medical conditions in
school. The arrangements should show an understanding of how medical conditions
impact on a child's ability to learn, as well as increase confidence and promote self-care.
They should ensure that staff are properly trained to provide the support that pupils need.
5
In this document, references to 'governing body' include proprietors in academies and management
committees of PRUs
6
All children must receive a full-time education, unless this would not be in their best interests because of
their health needs
7
Further advice:
Children and young people with medical conditions are entitled to a full education
and have the same rights of admission to school as other children. This means that
no child with a medical condition can be denied admission⁷ or prevented from taking
up a place in school because arrangements for their medical condition have not
been made. However, in line with their safeguarding duties, governing bodies should
ensure that pupils' health is not put at unnecessary risk from, for example, infectious
diseases. They therefore do not have to accept a child in school at times where it
would be detrimental to the health of that child or others to do so.
8.
Governing bodies must ensure that the arrangements they put in place are
sufficient to meet their statutory responsibilities and should ensure that policies, plans,
procedures and systems are properly and effectively implemented.
Developing the school's policy
9.
Governing bodies should ensure that all schools develop a policy for supporting
pupils with medical conditions that is reviewed regularly and is readily accessible to
parents and school staff.
Further advice:
In developing their policy, schools may wish to seek advice from any relevant
healthcare professional.
Policy implementation
10.
Governing bodies should ensure that the arrangements they set up include details
on how the school's policy will be implemented effectively, including a named person who
has overall responsibility for policy implementation.
7
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/school-admissions-code--2
8
Further advice:
In respect of implementation, school policies should include:
who is responsible for ensuring that sufficient staff are suitably trained;
a commitment that all relevant staff will be made aware of the child's
condition;
cover arrangements in case of staff absence or staff turnover to ensure
someone is always available;
briefing for supply teachers;
risk assessments for school visits, holidays, and other school activities outside
the normal timetable; and
monitoring of individual healthcare plans.
Procedure to be followed when notification is received that a pupil has
a medical condition
11.
Governing bodies should ensure that the school's policy sets out the procedures
to be followed whenever a school is notified that a pupil has a medical condition.
Further advice:
Procedures should also be in place to cover any transitional arrangements between
schools, the process to be followed upon reintegration or when pupils' needs
change, and arrangements for any staff training or support. For children starting at a
new school, arrangements should be in place in time for the start of the relevant
school term. In other cases, such as a new diagnosis or children moving to a new
school mid-term, every effort should be made to ensure that arrangements are put in
place within two weeks.
Schools do not have to wait for a formal diagnosis before providing support to pupils.
In cases where a pupil's medical condition is unclear, or where there is a difference
of opinion, judgements will be needed about what support to provide based on the
available evidence. This would normally involve some form of medical evidence and
consultation with parents. Where evidence conflicts, some degree of challenge may
be necessary to ensure that the right support can be put in place.
Individual healthcare plans
12.
Governing bodies should ensure that the school's policy covers the role of
individual healthcare plans, and who is responsible for their development, in supporting
pupils at school with medical conditions.
9
13.
The governing body should ensure that plans are reviewed at least annually, or
earlier if evidence is presented that the child's needs have changed. They should be
developed with the child's best interests in mind and ensure that the school assesses
and manages risks to the child's education, health and social wellbeing, and minimises
disruption.
Further advice:
Individual healthcare plans can help to ensure that schools effectively support pupils
with medical conditions. They provide clarity about what needs to be done, when and
by whom. They will often be essential, such as in cases where conditions fluctuate or
where there is a high risk that emergency intervention will be needed, and are likely
to be helpful in the majority of other cases, especially where medical conditions are
long-term and complex. However, not all children will require one. The school,
healthcare professional and parent should agree, based on evidence, when a
healthcare plan would be inappropriate or disproportionate. If consensus cannot be
reached, the headteacher is best placed to take a final view. A flow chart for
identifying and agreeing the support a child needs and developing an individual
healthcare plan is provided at annex A.
The format of individual healthcare plans may vary to enable schools to choose
whichever is the most effective for the specific needs of each pupil. They should be
easily accessible to all who need to refer to them, while preserving confidentiality.
Plans should not be a burden on a school, but should capture the key information
and actions that are required to support the child effectively. The level of detail within
plans will depend on the complexity of the child's condition and the degree of support
needed. This is important because different children with the same health condition
may require very different support. Where a child has SEN but does not have a
statement or EHC plan, their special educational needs should be mentioned in their
individual healthcare plan.
Individual healthcare plans (and their review) may be initiated, in consultation with
the parent, by a member of school staff or a healthcare professional involved in
providing care to the child. Plans should be drawn up in partnership between the
10
school, parents, and a relevant healthcare professional, e.g. school nurse, specialist
or children's community nurse or paediatrician, who can best advise on the particular
needs of the child. Pupils should also be involved whenever appropriate. The aim
should be to capture the steps which a school should take to help the child manage
their condition and overcome any potential barriers to getting the most from their
education and how they might work with other statutory services. Partners should
agree who will take the lead in writing the plan, but responsibility for ensuring it is
finalised and implemented rests with the school.
Where the child has a special educational need identified in a statement or EHC
plan, the individual healthcare plan should be linked to or become part of that
statement or EHC plan.
Where a child is returning to school following a period of hospital education or
alternative provision (including home tuition), schools should work with the local
authority and education provider to ensure that the individual healthcare plan
identifies the support the child will need to reintegrate effectively.
14.
When deciding what information should be recorded on individual healthcare
plans, the governing body should consider the following:
the medical condition, its triggers, signs, symptoms and treatments;
the pupil's resulting needs, including medication (dose, side effects and storage)
and other treatments, time, facilities, equipment, testing, access to food and drink
where this is used to manage their condition, dietary requirements and
environmental issues, e.g. crowded corridors, travel time between lessons;
specific support for the pupil's educational, social and emotional needs - for
example, how absences will be managed, requirements for extra time to complete
exams, use of rest periods or additional support in catching up with lessons,
counselling sessions;
the level of support needed (some children will be able to take responsibility for
their own health needs) including in emergencies. If a child is self-managing their
medication, this should be clearly stated with appropriate arrangements for
monitoring;
who will provide this support, their training needs, expectations of their role and
confirmation of proficiency to provide support for the child's medical condition from
a healthcare professional; and cover arrangements for when they are unavailable;
who in the school needs to be aware of the child's condition and the support
required;
11
arrangements for written permission from parents and the headteacher for
medication to be administered by a member of staff, or self-administered by the
pupil during school hours;
separate arrangements or procedures required for school trips or other school
activities outside of the normal school timetable that will ensure the child can
participate, e.g. risk assessments;
where confidentiality issues are raised by the parent/child, the designated
individuals to be entrusted with information about the child's condition; and
what to do in an emergency, including whom to contact, and contingency
arrangements. Some children may have an emergency healthcare plan prepared
by their lead clinician that could be used to inform development of their individual
healthcare plan.
Roles and responsibilities
15.
The governing body should ensure that the school's policy clearly identifies the
roles and responsibilities of all those involved in the arrangements they make to support
pupils at school with medical conditions.
Further advice:
Supporting a child with a medical condition during school hours is not the sole
responsibility of one person. A school's ability to provide effective support will
depend to an appreciable extent on working co-operatively with other agencies.
Partnership working between school staff, healthcare professionals (and, where
appropriate, social care professionals), local authorities, and parents and pupils will
be critical. An essential requirement for any policy therefore will be to identify
collaborative working arrangements between all those involved, showing how they
will work in partnership to ensure that the needs of pupils with medical conditions are
met effectively.
Some of the most important roles and responsibilities are listed below, but schools
may additionally want to cover a wider range of people in their policy.
16.
Governing bodies must make arrangements to support pupils with medical
conditions in school, including making sure that a policy for supporting pupils with
medical conditions in school is developed and implemented. They should ensure that
sufficient staff have received suitable training and are competent before they take on
responsibility to support children with medical conditions.
12
Further advice on the role of governing bodies:
Governing bodies should ensure that pupils with medical conditions are supported to
enable the fullest participation possible in all aspects of school life. They should also
ensure that any members of school staff who provide support to pupils with medical
conditions are able to access information and other teaching support materials as
needed.
Advice on the role of headteachers:
Headteachers should ensure that their school's policy is developed and effectively
implemented with partners. This includes ensuring that all staff are aware of the
policy for supporting pupils with medical conditions and understand their role in its
implementation. Headteachers should ensure that all staff who need to know are
aware of the child's condition. They should also ensure that sufficient trained
numbers of staff are available to implement the policy and deliver against all
individual healthcare plans, including in contingency and emergency situations. This
may involve recruiting a member of staff for this purpose. Headteachers have overall
responsibility for the development of individual healthcare plans. They should also
make sure that school staff are appropriately insured and are aware that they are
insured to support pupils in this way. They should contact the school nursing service
in the case of any child who has a medical condition that may require support at
school, but who has not yet been brought to the attention of the school nurse.
Advice on the role of parents:
Parents should provide the school with sufficient and up-to-date information about
their child's medical needs. They may in some cases be the first to notify the school
that their child has a medical condition. Parents are key partners and should be
involved in the development and review of their child's individual healthcare plan,
and may be involved in its drafting. They should carry out any action they have
agreed to as part of its implementation, e.g. provide medicines and equipment and
ensure they or another nominated adult are contactable at all times.
Advice on the role of pupils:
Pupils with medical conditions will often be best placed to provide information about
how their condition affects them. They should be fully involved in discussions about
their medical support needs and contribute as much as possible to the development
of, and comply with, their individual healthcare plan. Other pupils will often be
sensitive to the needs of those with medical conditions.
13
Advice on the role of school staff:
Any member of school staff may be asked to provide support to pupils with medical
conditions, including the administering of medicines, although they cannot be
required to do so. Although administering medicines is not part of teachers'
professional duties, they should take into account the needs of pupils with medical
conditions that they teach. School staff should receive sufficient and suitable training
and achieve the necessary level of competency before they take on responsibility to
support children with medical conditions. Any member of school staff should know
what to do and respond accordingly when they become aware that a pupil with a
medical condition needs help.
Advice on the role of school nurses:
Every school has access to school nursing services. They are responsible for
notifying the school when a child has been identified as having a medical condition
which will require support in school. Wherever possible, they should do this before
the child starts at the school. They would not usually have an extensive role in
ensuring that schools are taking appropriate steps to support children with medical
conditions, but may support staff on implementing a child's individual healthcare plan
and provide advice and liaison, for example on training. School nurses can liaise with
lead clinicians locally on appropriate support for the child and associated staff
training needs; for example, there are good models of local specialist nursing teams
offering training to local school staff, hosted by a local school. Community nursing
teams will also be a valuable potential resource for a school seeking advice and
support in relation to children with a medical condition. See also paragraphs 18 to 20
below about training for school staff.
Advice on the role of other healthcare professionals:
Other healthcare professionals, including GPs and paediatricians, should notify the
school nurse when a child has been identified as having a medical condition that will
require support at school. They may provide advice on developing individual
healthcare plans. Specialist local health teams may be able to provide support in
schools for children with particular conditions (e.g. asthma, diabetes, epilepsy).
14
Advice on the role of local authorities:
Local authorities are commissioners of school nurses for maintained schools and
academies. Under Section 10 of the Children Act 2004, they have a duty to promote
co-operation between relevant partners - such as governing bodies of maintained
schools, proprietors of academies, clinical commissioning groups and NHS England
- with a view to improving the wellbeing of children with regard to their physical and
mental health, and their education, training and recreation. Local authorities and
clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) must make joint commissioning
arrangements for education, health and care provision for children and young people
with SEN or disabilities (Section 26 of the Children and Families Act 2014). Local
authorities should provide support, advice and guidance, including suitable training
for school staff, to ensure that the support specified within individual healthcare plans
can be delivered effectively. Local authorities should work with schools to support
pupils with medical conditions to attend full-time. Where pupils would not receive a
suitable education in a mainstream school because of their health needs, the local
authority has a duty to make other arrangements. Statutory guidance for local
authorities 8 sets out that they should be ready to make arrangements under this duty
when it is clear that a child will be away from school for 15 days or more because of
health needs 9 (whether consecutive or cumulative across the school year).
8
Local authorities must have regard to statutory guidance on the education of children unable to attend
school because of health needs.
9
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/education-for-children-with-health-needs-who-cannot-atend-
school
15
Advice on the role of clinical commissioning groups (CCGs):
Clinical commissioning groups commission other healthcare professionals such as
specialist nurses. They should ensure that commissioning is responsive to children's
needs, and that health services are able to co-operate with schools supporting
children with medical conditions. They have a reciprocal duty to co-operate under
Section 10 of the Children Act 2004 and must make joint commissioning
arrangements for education, health and care provision for children and young people
with SEN or disabilities (as described above for local authorities). Clinical
commissioning groups should be responsive to local authorities and schools seeking
to strengthen links between health services and schools, and consider how to
encourage health services in providing support and advice (and can help with any
potential issues or obstacles in relation to this). The local Health and Wellbeing
Board will also provide a forum for local authorities and CCGs to consider with other
partners, including locally elected representatives, how to strengthen links between
education, health and care settings. Since 2013 Local Authorities have been
responsible for commissioning public health services for school-aged children
including school nursing. CCGs should be aware that this does not include clinical
support for children in schools who have long-term conditions and disabilities, which
remains a CCG commissioning responsibility. Children in special schools in
particular may need care which falls outside the remit of local authority
commissioned school nurses, such as gastrostomy and tracheostomy care, or
postural support. CCGs should ensure their commissioning arrangements are
adequate to provide the ongoing support essential to the safety of these vulnerable
children whilst in school.
Advice on providers of health services:
Providers of health services should co-operate with schools that are supporting
children with a medical condition, including appropriate communication, liaison with
school nurses and other healthcare professionals such as specialist and children's
community nurses, as well as participating in locally developed outreach and
training. Health services can provide valuable support, information, advice and
guidance to schools, and their staff, to support children with medical conditions at
school.
16
Advice on the role of Ofsted:
Ofsted's new common inspection framework came into effect on 1 September 2015,
aimed at promoting greater consistency across inspection remits. Inspectors must
consider how well a school meets the needs of the full range of pupils, including
those with medical conditions. Key judgements will be informed by the progress and
achievement of these children alongside those of pupils with special educational
needs and disabilities, and also by pupils' spiritual, moral, social and cultural
development.
Staff training and support
17.
Governing bodies should ensure that the school's policy sets out clearly how staff
will be supported in carrying out their role to support pupils with medical conditions, and
how this will be reviewed. This should specify how training needs are assessed, and how
and by whom training will be commissioned and provided.
18.
The school's policy should be clear that any member of school staff providing
support to a pupil with medical needs should have received suitable training.
17
Further advice:
Suitable training should have been identified during the development or review of
individual healthcare plans. Some staff may already have some knowledge of the
specific support needed by a child with a medical condition and so extensive training
may not be required. Staff who provide support to pupils with medical conditions
should be included in meetings where this is discussed.
The relevant healthcare professional should normally lead on identifying and
agreeing with the school the type and level of training required, and how this can be
obtained. Schools may choose to arrange training themselves and should ensure
this remains up-to-date.
Training should be sufficient to ensure that staff are competent and have confidence
in their ability to support pupils with medical conditions, and to fulfil the requirements
as set out in individual healthcare plans. They will need an understanding of the
specific medical conditions they are being asked to deal with, their implications and
preventative measures.
A first-aid certificate does not constitute appropriate training in supporting children
with medical conditions.
Healthcare professionals, including the school nurse, can provide confirmation of the
proficiency of staff in a medical procedure, or in providing medication.
The school's policy should additionally set out arrangements for whole-school
awareness training so that all staff are aware of the school's policy for supporting
pupils with medical conditions and their role in implementing that policy. Induction
arrangements for new staff should be included. The relevant healthcare professional
should be able to advise on training that will help ensure that all medical conditions
affecting pupils in the school are understood fully. This includes preventative and
emergency measures so that staff can recognise and act quickly when a problem
occurs.
The family of a child will often be key in providing relevant information to school staff
about how their child's needs can be met, and parents should be asked for their
views. They should provide specific advice, but should not be the sole trainer.
Governing bodies should consider providing details of continuing professional
development opportunities.
19.
Staff must not give prescription medicines or undertake healthcare procedures
without appropriate training (updated to reflect requirements within individual healthcare
plans).
18
Further advice:
In some cases, written instructions from the parent or on the medication container
dispensed by the pharmacist may be considered sufficient, but ultimately this is for
the school to decide, having taken into consideration the training requirements as
specified in pupils' individual health care plans.
The child's role in managing their own medical needs
20.
Governing bodies should ensure that the school's policy covers arrangements for
children who are competent to manage their own health needs and medicines.
Further advice:
After discussion with parents, children who are competent should be encouraged to
take responsibility for managing their own medicines and procedures. This should be
reflected within individual healthcare plans.
Wherever possible, children should be allowed to carry their own medicines and
relevant devices or should be able to access their medicines for self-medication
quickly and easily. Children who can take their medicines themselves or manage
procedures may require an appropriate level of supervision. If it is not appropriate for
a child to self-manage, relevant staff should help to administer medicines and
manage procedures for them.
If a child refuses to take medicine or carry out a necessary procedure, staff should
not force them to do so, but follow the procedure agreed in the individual healthcare
plan. Parents should be informed so that alternative options can be considered.
Managing medicines on school premises
21.
The governing body should ensure that the school's policy is clear about the
procedures to be followed for managing medicines.
19
Further advice:
Although schools may already have such procedures in place, they should reflect the
following details:
medicines should only be administered at school when it would be detrimental
to a child's health or school attendance not to do so
no child under 16 should be given prescription or non-prescription medicines
without their parent's written consent - except in exceptional circumstances
where the medicine has been prescribed to the child without the knowledge of
the parents. In such cases, every effort should be made to encourage the
child or young person to involve their parents while respecting their right to
confidentiality. Schools should set out the circumstances in which non-
prescription medicines may be administered
a child under 16 should never be given medicine containing aspirin unless
prescribed by a doctor. Medication, e.g. for pain relief, should never be
administered without first checking maximum dosages and when the previous
dose was taken. Parents should be informed
where clinically possible, medicines should be prescribed in dose frequencies
which enable them to be taken outside school hours
schools should only accept prescribed medicines if these are in-date, labelled,
provided in the original container as dispensed by a pharmacist and include
instructions for administration, dosage and storage. The exception to this is
insulin, which must still be in date, but will generally be available to schools
inside an insulin pen or a pump, rather than in its original container
all medicines should be stored safely. Children should know where their
medicines are at all times and be able to access them immediately. Where
relevant, they should know who holds the key to the storage facility.
Medicines and devices such as asthma inhalers, blood glucose testing meters
and adrenaline pens should be always readily available to children and not
locked away. This is particularly important to consider when outside of school
premises, e.g. on school trips
20
when no longer required, medicines should be returned to the parent to
arrange for safe disposal. Sharps boxes should always be used for the
disposal of needles and other sharps
a child who has been prescribed a controlled drug may legally have it in their
possession if they are competent to do so, but passing it to another child for
use is an offence. Monitoring arrangements may be necessary. Schools
should otherwise keep controlled drugs that have been prescribed for a pupil
securely stored in a non-portable container and only named staff should have
access. Controlled drugs should be easily accessible in an emergency. A
record should be kept of any doses used and the amount of the controlled
drug held
school staff may administer a controlled drug to the child for whom it has been
prescribed. Staff administering medicines should do so in accordance with the
prescriber's instructions. Schools should keep a record of all medicines
administered to individual children, stating what, how and how much was
administered, when and by whom. Any side effects of the medication to be
administered at school should be noted in school
Record keeping
22.
Governing bodies should ensure that written records are kept of all medicines
administered to children.
Further advice:
Records offer protection to staff and children and provide evidence that agreed
procedures have been followed. Parents should be informed if their child has been
unwell at school.
Emergency procedures
23.
Governing bodies should ensure that the school's policy sets out what should
happen in an emergency situation.
21
Further advice:
As part of general risk management processes, all schools should have
arrangements in place for dealing with emergencies for all school activities wherever
they take place, including on school trips within and outside the UK.
Where a child has an individual healthcare plan, this should clearly define what
constitutes an emergency and explain what to do, including ensuring that all relevant
staff are aware of emergency symptoms and procedures. Other pupils in the school
should know what to do in general terms, such as informing a teacher immediately if
they think help is needed.
If a child needs to be taken to hospital, staff should stay with the child until the parent
arrives, or accompany a child taken to hospital by ambulance. Schools need to
ensure they understand the local emergency services' cover arrangements and that
the correct information is provided for navigation systems.
Day trips, residential visits and sporting activities
24.
Governing bodies should ensure that their arrangements are clear and
unambiguous about the need to support actively pupils with medical conditions to
participate in school trips and visits, or in sporting activities, and not prevent them from
doing SO.
Further advice:
Teachers should be aware of how a child's medical condition will impact on their
participation, but there should be enough flexibility for all children to participate
according to their own abilities and with any reasonable adjustments. Schools should
make arrangements for the inclusion of pupils in such activities with any adjustments
as required unless evidence from a clinician such as a GP states that this is not
possible.
Schools should consider what reasonable adjustments they might make to enable
children with medical needs to participate fully and safely on visits. It is best practice
to carry out a risk assessment so that planning arrangements take account of any
steps needed to ensure that pupils with medical conditions are included. This will
require consultation with parents and pupils and advice from the relevant healthcare
professional to ensure that pupils can participate safely. Please also see Health and
Safety Executive (HSE) guidance on school trips.
22
Unacceptable practice
25.
Governing bodies should ensure that the school's policy is explicit about what
practice is not acceptable.
Further advice:
Although school staff should use their discretion and judge each case on its merits
with reference to the child's individual healthcare plan, it is not generally acceptable
practice to:
prevent children from easily accessing their inhalers and medication and
administering their medication when and where necessary;
assume that every child with the same condition requires the same treatment;
ignore the views of the child or their parents; or ignore medical evidence or
opinion (although this may be challenged);
send children with medical conditions home frequently for reasons associated
with their medical condition or prevent them from staying for normal school
activities, including lunch, unless this is specified in their individual healthcare
plans;
if the child becomes ill, send them to the school office or medical room
unaccompanied or with someone unsuitable;
penalise children for their attendance record if their absences are related to
their medical condition, e.g. hospital appointments;
prevent pupils from drinking, eating or taking toilet or other breaks whenever
they need to in order to manage their medical condition effectively;
require parents, or otherwise make them feel obliged, to attend school to
administer medication or provide medical support to their child, including with
toileting issues. No parent should have to give up working because the school
is failing to support their child's medical needs; or
prevent children from participating, or create unnecessary barriers to children
participating in any aspect of school life, including school trips, e.g. by
requiring parents to accompany the child.
Liability and indemnity
26.
Governing bodies of maintained schools and management committees of PRUs
should ensure that the appropriate level of insurance is in place and appropriately reflects
23
the level of risk. Proprietors of academies should ensure that either the appropriate level
of insurance is in place or that the academy is a member of the Department for
Education's Risk Protection Arrangement (RPA).
Further advice:
It is important that the school policy sets out the details of the school's insurance
arrangements which cover staff providing support to pupils with medical conditions.
Insurance policies should be accessible to staff providing such support.
Insurance policies should provide liability cover relating to the administration of
medication, but individual cover may need to be arranged for any healthcare
procedures. The level and ambit of cover required must be ascertained directly from
the relevant insurers. Any requirements of the insurance, such as the need for staff
to be trained, should be made clear and complied with.
In the event of a claim alleging negligence by a member of staff, civil actions are
likely to be brought against the employer.
RPA is a scheme provided specifically for academies.
Complaints
27.
Governing bodies should ensure that the school's policy sets out how complaints
concerning the support provided to pupils with medical conditions may be made and will
be handled.
Further advice:
Should parents or pupils be dissatisfied with the support provided they should
discuss their concerns directly with the school. If for whatever reason this does not
resolve the issue, they may make a formal complaint via the school's complaints
procedure. Making a formal complaint to the Department for Education should only
occur if it comes within scope of section 496/497 of the Education Act 1996 and after
other attempts at resolution have been exhausted. In the case of academies, it will
be relevant to consider whether the academy has breached the terms of its Funding
Agreement or failed to comply with any other legal obligation placed on
it. Ultimately, parents (and pupils) will be able to take independent legal advice and
bring formal proceedings if they consider they have legitimate grounds to do so.
10 The contractual relationship between the academy and the Department for Education
24
Other issues for consideration
Advice:
Governing bodies may want the school's policy to refer to:
home-to-school transport - this is the responsibility of local authorities, who
may find it helpful to be aware of a pupil's individual healthcare plan and what
it contains, especially in respect of emergency situations. This may be helpful
in developing transport healthcare plans 11 for pupils with life-threatening
conditions;
defibrillators - sudden cardiac arrest is when the heart stops beating and can
happen to people of any age and without warning. If this does happen, quick
action (in the form of early CPR and defibrillation) can help save lives. A
defibrillator is a machine used to give an electric shock to restart a patient's
heart when they are in cardiac arrest. Modern defibrillators are easy to use,
inexpensive and safe.
Schools are advised to consider purchasing a defibrillator as part of
their first-aid equipment. DfE has put arrangements 12 in place to assist
schools in purchasing defibrillators at reduced cost. If schools install a
defibrillator, they should notify the local NHS ambulance service of its
location.
Staff members appointed as first-aiders should already be trained in
the use of CPR and may wish to promote these techniques more
widely in the school, amongst both teachers and pupils alike; and
asthma inhalers - schools may hold asthma inhalers for emergency use. This
is entirely voluntary, and the Department of Health has published a protocol¹ 13
which provides further information.
11 These are separate to the individual healthcare plans referred to throughout this document.
12
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/automated-external-defibrillators-aeds-in-schodls
13
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emergency-asthma-inhalers-for-use-in-schools
25
Further sources of information
Other safeguarding legislation
Section 21 of the Education Act 2002 provides that governing bodies of maintained
schools must, in discharging their functions in relation to the conduct of the school,
promote the wellbeing of pupils at the school.
Section 175 of the Education Act 2002 provides that governing bodies of maintained
schools must make arrangements for ensuring that their functions relating to the conduct
of the school are exercised with a view to safeguarding and promoting the welfare of
children who are pupils at the school. Part 3, and in particular paragraph 7 of the
Schedule to the Education (Independent School Standards) Regulations 2014 sets this
out in relation to academy schools and alternative provision academies.
Section 3 of the Children Act 1989 confers a duty on a person with the care of a child
(who does not have parental responsibility for the child) to do all that is reasonable in all
the circumstances for the purposes of safeguarding or promoting the welfare of the child.
Section 17 of the Children Act 1989 gives local authorities a general duty to safeguard
and promote the welfare of children in need in their area.
Section 10 of the Children Act 2004 provides that the local authority must make
arrangements to promote co-operation between the authority and relevant partners
(including the governing body of a maintained school, the proprietor of an academy,
clinical commissioning groups and the NHS Commissioning Board) with a view to
improving the wellbeing of children, including their physical and mental health, protection
from harm and neglect, and education. Relevant partners are under a duty to co-operate
in the making of these arrangements.
The NHS Act 2006: Section 3 gives Clinical Commissioning Groups a duty to arrange
for the provision of health services to the extent the CCG considers it necessary to meet
the reasonable needs of the persons for whom it is responsible. Section 3A provides for
a CCG to arrange such services as it considers appropriate to secure improvements in
physical and mental health of, and in the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of illness,
in, the persons for whom it is responsible. Section 2A provides for local authorities to
secure improvements to public health, and in doing so, to commission school nurses.
Governing Bodies' duties towards disabled children and adults are included in the
Equality Act 2010, and the key elements are as follows:
They must not discriminate against, harass or victimise disabled children and
young people
26
They must make reasonable adjustments to ensure that disabled children and
young people are not at a substantial disadvantage compared with their peers.
This duty is anticipatory: adjustments must be planned and put in place in
advance, to prevent that disadvantage
Other relevant legislation
Section 2 of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, and the associated regulations,
provides that it is the duty of the employer (the local authority, governing body or
academy trust) to take reasonable steps to ensure that staff and pupils are not exposed
to risks to their health and safety.
Under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 and associated Regulations the supply,
administration, possession and storage of certain drugs are controlled. Schools may
have a child who has been prescribed a controlled drug.
The Medicines Act 1968 specifies the way that medicines are prescribed, supplied and
administered within the UK and places restrictions on dealings with medicinal products,
including their administration.
Regulation 5 of the School Premises (England) Regulations 2012 (as amended)
provides that maintained schools must have accommodation appropriate and readily
available for use for medical examination and treatment and for the caring of sick or
injured pupils. It must contain a washing facility and be reasonably near to a toilet. It
must not be teaching accommodation. Paragraph 24 of the Schedule to the the
Education (Independent School Standards) Regulations 2014 replicates this provision for
independent schools (including academy schools and alternative provision academies).
The Special Educational Needs and Disability Code of Practice 14
Section 19 of the Education Act 1996 (as amended by Section 3 of the Children,
Schools and Families Act 2010) provides a duty on local authorities of maintained
schools to arrange suitable education for those who would not receive such education
unless such arrangements are made for them. This education must be full-time, or such
part-time education as is in a child's best interests because of their health needs.
Associated resources
View links to other information and associated advice, guidance and resources 15 ,e.g.
templates, and to organisations providing advice and support on specific medical
conditions.
14
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-code-of-practice-0-to-25
27
Annex A: Model process for developing individual
healthcare plans
Parent or healthcare professional informs school that child has
been newly diagnosed, or is due to attend new school, or is due
to return to school after a long-term absence, or that needs
have changed
Headteacher or senior member of school staff to whom this
has been delegated, co-ordinates meeting to discuss child's
medical support needs; and identifies member of school staff
who will provide support to pupil
Meeting to discuss and agree on need for IHCP to include key
school staff, child, parent, relevant healthcare professional and
other medical/health clinician as appropriate (or to consider
written evidence provided by them)
Develop IHCP in partnership - agree who leads on writing it.
Input from healthcare professional must be provided
School staff training needs identified
Healthcare professional commissions/delivers training and staff
signed-off as competent - review date agreed
IHCP implemented and circulated to all relevant staff
IHCP reviewed annually or when condition changes. Parent or
healthcare professional to initiate
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/supporting-pupils-at-scbool-with-medical-conditions-3.
28
Department
for Education
© Crown copyright 2015
This publication (not including logos) is licensed under the terms of the Open
Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. Where we have identified any
third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright
holders concerned.
To view this licence:
visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3
email
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk
write to
Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London, TW9 4DU
About this publication:
enquiries www.education.gov.uk/contactus
download www.gov.uk/government/publications
Reference: DFE-00393-2014
Follow us on Twitter:
f
Like us on Facebook:
@educationgovuk
facebook.com/educationgovuk
29
