Department
for Education
Teachers' Standards
Guidance for school leaders,
school staff and governing bodies
July 2011 (introduction updated June
2013, latest terminology update December
2021)
Contents
Summary
3
Introduction, legal standing and interpretation
5
Presentation of the standards
7
Progression and professional development
7
Date of introduction of the standards
8
Note on terminology used/glossary
9
Teachers' Standards
10
Preamble
10
Part One: Teaching
10
Part Two: Personal and professional conduct
14
2
Summary
About the standards
These are the Teachers' Standards for use in schools in England from September 2012.
The standards define the minimum level of practice expected of trainees and teachers
from the point of being awarded qualified teacher status (QTS).
The Teachers' Standards are used to assess all trainees working towards QTS, and all
those completing their statutory induction period. They are also used to assess the
performance of all teachers with QTS who are subject to The Education (School
Teachers' Appraisal) (England) Regulations 2012, and may additionally be used to
assess the performance of teachers who are subject to these regulations and who hold
qualified teacher learning and skills (QTLS) status.
The standards were introduced following the recommendations in the reports of the
independent Review of Teachers' Standards, chaired by Sally Coates. These reports are
available from GOV.UK.
Expiry or review date
These standards will apply until further notice.
What legislation do the standards refer to?
Schedule 2 of The Education (School Teachers' Qualifications) (England) Regulations
2003
The Education (School Teachers' Appraisal) (England) Regulations 2012
Who are the standards for?
The Teachers' Standards apply to:
trainees working towards QTS;
all teachers completing their statutory induction period (early career teachers
[ECTs]); and
teachers in maintained schools, including maintained special schools, who are
covered by the 2012 appraisal regulations.
The Teaching Regulation Agency (TRA) will use Part Two of the Teachers' Standards,
which relates to personal and professional conduct, when assessing cases of serious
misconduct, regardless of the education sector in which theteacher works.
3
What documents do the standards replace?
These standards replaced the standards for qualified teacher status (QTS) and the core
professional standards, published by the former Training and Development Agency for
Schools (TDA); and the General Teaching Council for England's Code of Conduct and
Practice for Registered Teachers.
4
Introduction, legal standing and interpretation
1. The Teachers' Standards published by the Secretary of State for Education
introduced some significant changes in terms of structure, content and application.
This document is designed to assist those who will be using the standards to
understand those changes and to implement the standards effectively.
2. The Teachers' Standards contained in this document came into effect on
1 September 2012, though the Teaching Agency (now the Teaching Regulation
Agency) has used the conduct elements since 1 April 2012 as a reference point
when considering whether a teacher's conduct has fallen significantly short of the
standard of behaviour expected of a teacher. They replaced the standards for
qualified teacher status (QTS) and the core professional standards previously
published by the Training and Development Agency for Schools (TDA), 1 as well as
the General Teaching Council for England's of Conduct and Practice for
Registered Teachers.
3. The standards apply to the vast majority of teachers regardless of their
career stage. The Teachers' Standards apply to: trainees working towards QTS;
all teachers completing their statutory induction period; and those covered by the
new performance appraisal arrangements (subject to the exception described in
para. 4 below). Part Two of the Teachers' Standards, which relates to professional
and personal conduct, is used to assess cases of serious misconduct, regardless
of the sector in which the teacher works.
4. Since 1 April 2012, teachers with qualified teacher learning and skills (QTLS)
status have been able to teach in schools as fully qualified teachers. This change
was made to give schools greater access to experienced teachers of vocational
subjects, as recommended in Professor Alison Wolf's Review of Vocational
Education. Headteachers have the freedom to decide the standards against which
they assess the performance of QTLS holders. They can assess QTLS holders'
performance against the Teachers' Standards, against any other set of standards
relating to teacher performance issued by the Secretary of State, against any
other professional standards that are relevant to their performance, or against any
combination of those three. Before, or as soon as practicable after the start of
each appraisal period, QTLS teachers (like other teachers) must be informed of
the standards against which their performance in that appraisal period will be
assessed.
1 The standards for qualified teacher status and the core professional standards are available from The
National Archives.
5
5. The standards define the minimum level of practice expected of trainees and
teachers from the point of being awarded QTS. The standards set out in this
document constitute the 'specified standards' within the meaning given to that
phrase in Schedule 2 of The Education (School Teachers' Qualifications)
(England) Regulations 2003².
6. The standards need to be applied as appropriate to the role and context within
which a trainee or teacher is practising. Providers of initial teacher training (ITT)
should assess trainees against the standards in a way that is consistent with what
could reasonably be expected of a trainee teacher prior to the award of QTS.
Providers need to ensure that their programmes are designed and delivered in
such a way as to allow all trainees to meet these standards, as set out in the
Secretary of State's Initial Teacher Training (ITT) Criteria³.
7. Similarly, headteachers (or appraisers) should assess teachers' performance
against the standards to a level that is consistent with what should reasonably be
expected of a teacher in the relevant role and at the relevant stage of their career
(whether they are an early career teacher (ECT), a mid-career teacher, or a
more experienced practitioner). The professional judgement of headteachers and
appraisers is therefore central to appraisal against these standards.
8. The standards replaced the previous core professional standards, and are used to
assess an ECT's performance at the end of their induction period in employment.
The standards themselves do not specify any new or different elements to the
expectations placed on ECTs beyond those required for the award of QTS. The
decision about whether an ECT has met the standards to a satisfactory level at
the end of their induction period therefore needs to be made on the basis of what
should reasonably be expected of an ECT working in the relevant setting and
circumstances, within the framework set out by the standards. That judgement
should reflect the expectation that ECTs have effectively consolidated their
training, and are demonstrating their ability to meet the standards consistently
over a sustained period in their practice.
9. Following the period of induction, the standards continue to define the level of
practice at which all qualified teachers are expected to perform. Teachers'
performance is assessed against the standards as part of the new appraisal
arrangements in maintained schools.
2 Schedule 2 of The Education (School Teachers' Qualifications) (England) Regulations 2003 is available
from legislation.gov.uk.
3 The Initial Teacher Training (ITT) Criteria are available from GOV.UK.
6
Presentation of the standards
10. This document is presented in three parts, which together constitute the Teachers'
Standards: the Preamble, Part One and Part Two.
11. The Preamble summarises the values and behaviour that all teachers must
demonstrate throughout their careers. Part One comprises the Standards for
Teaching; Part Two comprises the Standards for Personal and Professional
Conduct.
12. In order to meet the standards, a trainee or teacher will need to demonstrate that
their practice is consistent with the definition set out in the Preamble, and that
they have met the standards in both Part One and Part Two of this document.
13. The standards are presented as separate headings, numbered from 1 to 8 in Part
One, each of which is accompanied by a number of bulleted subheadings. The
bullets, which are an integral part of the standards, are designed to amplify the
scope of each heading. The bulleted subheadings should not be interpreted as
separate standards in their own right but should be used by those assessing
trainees and teachers to track progress against the standard, to determine areas
where additional development might need to be observed, or to identify areas
where a trainee or teacher is already demonstrating excellent practice relevant to
that standard.
Progression and professional development
14. The standards have been designed to set out a basic framework within which all
teachers should operate from the point of initial qualification. Appropriate self-
evaluation, reflection and professional development activity is critical to improving
teachers' practice at all career stages. The standards set out clearly the key areas
in which a teacher should be able to assess his or her own practice, and receive
feedback from colleagues. As their careers progress, teachers will be expected to
extend the depth and breadth of knowledge, skill and understanding that they
demonstrate in meeting the standards, as is judged to be appropriate to the role
they are fulfilling and the context in which they are working.
7
Date of introduction of the standards
15. The revised standards came into effect on 1 September 2012, on which date they
became the 'specified standards' as defined in Schedule 2 of The Education
(School Teachers' Qualifications) (England) Regulations 2003. The Regulations
require that in order to be recommended for the award of QTS, in most cases⁴ a
person must meet the specified standards that are in place at the time of
assessment. Providers of initial teacher training need to ensure that all trainees
who complete their training after 1 September 2012 are assessed against the
standards that are in place as at the time of assessment, in accordance with the
Regulations.
16. ECTs who qualified under the previous standards but started induction on or after
1 September 2012, or had started but not completed induction by 1 September
2012, need to be assessed against the Teachers' Standards at the end of their
induction.
17. Existing teachers who have already passed induction will be expected to use the
Teachers' Standards instead of the previous core standards for appraisal,
identifying professional development, and other related purposes.
18. When considering new cases of serious misconduct received from 1 April 2012,
the Teaching Regulation Agency (formerly the National College for Teaching and
Leadership), acting on behalf of the Secretary of State, must have regard to the
personal and professional conduct aspects of the Teachers' Standards document
instead of the General Teaching Council for England's (GTCE) Code of Conduct
and Practice forRegistered Teachers. The Teaching Regulation Agency is still
able to refer to the GTCE's Code of Conduct for any partially completed cases it
received from the GTCE at the point of its abolition.
4
For some categories QTS can be awarded without undertaking ITT in England and meeting the QTS
standards. Those exempt from meeting the QTS standards are individuals who have already successfully
completed ITT or are recognised as teachers in another UK country and EEA nationals who are recognised
as teachers in another EEA member state. Qualified further education teachers who have qualified teacher
learning and skills (QTLS) status may also be exempt from meeting the Teachers' Standards.
8
Note on terminology used/glossary
Specific terminology used in the standards should be interpreted as having the following
meaning:
'Fundamental British values' is taken from the definition of extremism as
articulated in the new Prevent Strategy, which was launched in June 2011. It
includes 'democracy, the rule of law, individual liberty and mutual respect and
tolerance of different faiths and beliefs'.
'Parents' is intended to include carers, guardians and other adults acting in loco
parentis.
'Pupils' is used throughout the standards, but should be taken to include
references to children of all ages who are taught by qualified teachers, including
those in the Early Years Foundation Stage, and those in post-16 education.
'School' means whatever educational setting the standards are applied in. The
standards are required to be used by teachers in maintained schools and non-
maintained special schools. Use of the standards in academies and free schools
depends on the specific establishment arrangements of those schools.
Independent schools are not required to use the standards, but may do so if they
wish.
'Special educational needs', as defined by the Department for Education's
Special Educational Needs Code of Practice (2001), refers to children who have a
learning difficulty. This means that they either: have a significantly greater difficulty
in learning than the majority of children of the same age; or have a disability which
prevents or hinders them from making use of educational facilities of a kind
generally provided for children of the same age in schools within the area of the
local education authority.
'Statutory frameworks' includes all legal requirements, including but not limited
to the requirement to promote equal opportunities and to provide reasonable
adjustments for those with disabilities, as provided for in the Equality Act 2010.
The term also covers the professional duties of teachers as set out in the statutory
School Teachers' Pay and Conditions Document.
9
Teachers' Standards
Preamble
Teachers make the education of their pupils their first concern, and are accountable for
achieving the highest possible standards in work and conduct. Teachers act with honesty
and integrity; have strong subject knowledge, keep their knowledge and skills as
teachers up-to-date and are self-critical; forge positive professional relationships; and
work with parents in the best interests of their pupils.
Part One: Teaching
A teacher must:
1. Set high expectations which inspire, motivate and challenge pupils
establish a safe and stimulating environment for pupils, rooted in mutual
respect
set goals that stretch and challenge pupils of all backgrounds, abilities and
dispositions
demonstrate consistently the positive attitudes, values and behaviour which
are expected of pupils.
2. Promote good progress and outcomes by pupils
be accountable for pupils' attainment, progress and outcomes
be aware of pupils' capabilities and their prior knowledge, and plan teaching
to build on these
guide pupils to reflect on the progress they have made and their emerging
needs
demonstrate knowledge and understanding of how pupils learn and how
this impacts on teaching
encourage pupils to take a responsible and conscientious attitude to their
own work and study.
10
3. Demonstrate good subject and curriculum knowledge
have a secure knowledge of the relevant subject(s) and curriculum areas,
foster and maintain pupils' interest in the subject, and address
misunderstandings
demonstrate a critical understanding of developments in the subject and
curriculum areas, and promote the value of scholarship
demonstrate an understanding of and take responsibility for promoting high
standards of literacy, articulacy and the correct use of standard English,
whatever the teacher's specialist subject
if teaching early reading, demonstrate a clear understanding of systematic
synthetic phonics
if teaching early mathematics, demonstrate a clear understanding of
appropriate teaching strategies.
4. Plan and teach well structured lessons
impart knowledge and develop understanding through effective use of
lesson time
promote a love of learning and children's intellectual curiosity
set homework and plan other out-of-class activities to consolidate and
extend the knowledge and understanding pupils have acquired
reflect systematically on the effectiveness of lessons and approaches to
teaching
contribute to the design and provision of an engaging curriculum within the
relevant subject area(s).
5. Adapt teaching to respond to the strengths and needs of all pupils
know when and how to differentiate appropriately, using approaches which
enable pupils to be taught effectively
have a secure understanding of how a range of factors can inhibit pupils'
ability to learn, and how best to overcome these
demonstrate an awareness of the physical, social and intellectual
development of children, and know how to adapt teaching to support pupils'
education at different stages of development
11
have a clear understanding of the needs of all pupils, including those with
special educational needs; those of high ability; those with English as an
additional language; those with disabilities; and be able to use and evaluate
distinctive teaching approaches to engage and support them.
6. Make accurate and productive use of assessment
know and understand how to assess the relevant subject and curriculum
areas, including statutory assessment requirements
make use of formative and summative assessment to secure pupils'
progress
use relevant data to monitor progress, set targets, and plan subsequent
lessons
give pupils regular feedback, both orally and through accurate marking, and
encourage pupils to respond to the feedback.
7. Manage behaviour effectively to ensure a good and safe learning
environment
have clear rules and routines for behaviour in classrooms, and take
responsibility for promoting good and courteous behaviour both in
classrooms and around the school, in accordance with the school's
behaviour policy
have high expectations of behaviour, and establish a framework for
discipline with a range of strategies, using praise, sanctions and rewards
consistently and fairly
manage classes effectively, using approaches which are appropriate to
pupils' needs in order to involve and motivate them
maintain good relationships with pupils, exercise appropriate authority, and
act decisively when necessary.
12
8. Fulfil wider professional responsibilities
make a positive contribution to the wider life and ethos of the school
develop effective professional relationships with colleagues, knowing how
and when to draw on advice and specialist support
deploy support staff effectively
take responsibility for improving teaching through appropriate professional
development, responding to advice and feedback from colleagues
communicate effectively with parents with regard to pupils' achievements
and well-being.
13
Part Two: Personal and professional conduct
A teacher is expected to demonstrate consistently high standards of personal and
professional conduct. The following statements define the behaviour and attitudes which
set the required standard for conduct throughout a teacher's career.
Teachers uphold public trust in the profession and maintain high standards of
ethics and behaviour, within and outside school, by:
treating pupils with dignity, building relationships rooted in mutual respect,
and at all times observing proper boundaries appropriate to a teacher's
professional position
having regard for the need to safeguard pupils' well-being, in accordance
with statutory provisions
showing tolerance of and respect for the rights of others
not undermining fundamental British values, including democracy, the rule
of law, individual liberty and mutual respect, and tolerance of those with
different faiths and beliefs
ensuring that personal beliefs are not expressed in ways which exploit
pupils' vulnerability or might lead them to break the law.
Teachers must have proper and professional regard for the ethos, policies and
practices of the school in which they teach, and maintain high standards in their
own attendance and punctuality.
Teachers must have an understanding of, and always act within, the statutory
frameworks which set out their professional duties and responsibilities.
14
Department
for Education
© Crown copyright 2011
You may re-use this document/publication (not including logos) free of charge in any
format or medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence v2.0. To view this
licence, visit www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/Version/2or
email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at:
www.education.gov.uk/contactus.
This document is available for download at www.gov.uk/government/publications.
Reference: DFE-00066-2011
15
