Equality and
Human Rights
Commission
Guidance
Technical
guidance for
schools in
England
This Technical Guidance applies to the provisions in the Equality Act 2010 that
were brought into force on 1 October 2010, and the extension of reasonable
adjustments to include auxiliary aids and services that was brought into force on
1 September 2012.
equalityhumanrights.com
Technical guidance for schools in England
Contents
Foreword
9
Background
10
Status of the Technical Guidance
10
Scope of the Technical Guidance
11
Role of the Commission
11
Human rights
12
What is this Technical Guidance about?
12
Who is this Technical Guidance for?
13
How to read this Guidance
13
Chapter 1 I Overview of the schools provisions of the Act
15
Who has legal obligations?
15
Who is responsible for ensuring that a school does not breach the Act?
16
Who is protected?
17
What is unlawful?
17
What is unlawful discrimination?
18
What else is unlawful?
18
Harassment
18
Victimisation
19
Are there any exceptions to the schools provisions?
19
Positive action
20
Interaction with other legislation and responsibilities
21
Frequently asked questions (FAQs)
21
Chapter 2 I Admissions
23
1
Technical guidance for schools in England
How do the Act's requirements fit in with admissions legislation?
23
Examples and terminology used in this section
23
Who is the responsible body?
24
What does the Act say about admissions?
24
Arrangements for deciding who is offered admission
25
Information about the school and about the application process
25
Open events and school visits
26
Admissions criteria
27
Terms on which the school offers to admit the person as a pupil
27
Not admitting the person as a pupil
28
Selective schools and academic ability
29
Schools with a religious character or ethos
30
Single-sex schools
31
Single-sex boarding at schools
32
Frequently asked questions (FAQs)
32
Chapter 3 I Providing education and access to benefits, facilities and
services for pupils
34
What does the Act say?
34
What is covered?
34
Provision of education and access to a benefit, facility or service
35
Policies and procedures, such as those covering timetabling, school
uniform, and behaviour and discipline
35
All teaching, including curriculum delivery, classes, practical sessions, field
trips and outings, and homework
37
School trips (educational and non-educational)
38
Tests, assessments and exams
40
2
Technical guidance for schools in England
Academic and vocational options offered to pupils, such as GCSE choices
and extracurricular options
40
Careers education and information
41
Work experience and work placements
41
Afterschool clubs, and extracurricular leisure and sporting activities
provided by the school
42
School facilities, such as classrooms, laboratories, libraries, IT facilities,
school halls and dining halls, playgrounds, sporting facilities and residential
accommodation for boarders
43
What is not covered?
44
Content of the curriculum
44
Collective worship
44
Schools with religious character or ethos
45
Subjecting a pupil to any other detriment
47
Pregnancy and maternity discrimination
48
Frequently asked questions (FAQs)
49
Chapter 4 I Exclusions from school
51
How do the Act's requirements fit in with exclusions legislation?
51
Examples and terminology in this chapter
51
What does the Act say about exclusions?
52
What is unlawful under the Act?
52
Disabled pupils
53
Pregnancy and maternity discrimination
54
Excluded pupils
55
Frequently asked questions (FAQs)
55
Chapter 5 I Key concepts
56
What is discrimination?
56
3
Technical guidance for schools in England
Direct discrimination
56
Discrimination based on association
60
Discrimination based on perception
61
Discrimination because of pregnancy and maternity
62
Advertising an intention to discriminate
63
Unwanted conduct related to a protected characteristic
64
Indirect discrimination
65
The comparative approach
67
Making the comparison
68
Carrying out a formal comparative exercise
68
What is a 'proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim'?
69
Public authorities and justification of indirect discrimination
70
Discrimination arising from disability
71
Unfavourable treatment
72
Knowledge of disability
73
Relevance of reasonable adjustments
74
Harassment
74
Harassment related to a protected characteristic
75
Sexual harassment
75
Less favourable treatment of a pupil because he or she submits to or
rejects sexual harassment or harassment related to sex
76
Victimisation
78
Who is not protected?
79
Victimisation for actions of parents or siblings
79
Obligations to former pupils
81
4
Technical guidance for schools in England
Liability for employees, agents and others
81
Personal liability of employees and agents
82
Instructing and causing discrimination
83
Aiding contraventions
84
Protected characteristics
84
Disability
85
Gender reassignment
87
Pregnancy and maternity
88
Race
88
Religion or belief
88
Sex
89
Sexual orientation
90
Frequently asked questions (FAQs)
90
Chapter 6 I Reasonable adjustments for disabled pupils
92
What is the reasonable adjustments duty?
92
To whom does the duty apply?
93
What is meant by 'substantial disadvantage'?
94
What does the duty cover?
95
What is meant by 'reasonable' steps
96
Factors to be taken into account
97
The extent to which special educational provision will be provided to the
disabled pupil under Part 3 of the Children and Families Act 2014
97
The resources of the school and the availability of financial or other
assistance
98
The financial and other costs of making the adjustment
99
The effectiveness of the step in avoiding the disadvantage
99
5
Technical guidance for schools in England
The practicability of the adjustment
101
The effect of the disability on the individual
101
Health and safety requirements
102
The need to maintain academic, musical, sporting and other standards 103
The interests of other pupils and prospective pupils
103
Charging for providing reasonable adjustments
105
Frequently asked questions (FAQs)
106
Auxiliary aids
106
Other issues
108
Case studies
109
Chapter 7 I Positive action
113
What is 'positive action?
113
What does the Act say?
113
Basic requirements for taking positive action
114
Taking action to overcome or minimise disadvantage
116
Taking action to meet different needs
117
Taking action to encourage participation
118
Implementing and monitoring positive action
120
Positive action and the public sector equality duty
122
Frequently asked questions (FAQs)
123
Chapter 8 I Dispute resolution and enforcement
125
Resolving disputes
125
Obtaining information ('the questions procedure')
126
Breaches of the Act before 6 April 2014
126
Breaches of the Act on or after 6 April 2014
127
6
Technical guidance for schools in England
Time limits
128
Where claims are made
128
Claims brought in the county court
129
Who can make a claim?
129
Remedies
129
Disability discrimination tribunal claims
130
What claims can the tribunal hear?
130
Who can make a claim?
130
What can the tribunal order?
130
Disability discrimination claims against admission decisions of maintained
schools and academies
131
Admission appeal panels
131
Time limits
131
What can the panel order?
131
Who can make a claim?
131
Procedure in England
131
The Commission
132
Chapter 9 I Exceptions
133
Residential schools
133
Communal accommodation
133
Charity schools
134
Activity to support a charity
135
General exceptions that apply across the Act
135
Competitive sport and sex discrimination
135
Competitive sport: nationality, birthplace or residency
136
7
Technical guidance for schools in England
Statutory authority
136
Statutory requirement
136
Nationality discrimination authorised by statute or the executive
137
National security
137
Contacts
138
Alternative formats
138
8
Technical guidance for schools in England
Foreword
The Equality Act 2010 offers individuals protection against discrimination. The
Act also gives employers, businesses, service providers and education providers
greater clarity about their responsibilities, and it sets out a new expectation that
public services must treat everyone with dignity and respect.
The Equality and Human Rights Commission has a key role to play in bringing
the Act to life. It is committed to a vision of a modern Britain in which everyone is
treated with dignity and respect, and all have an equal chance to succeed.
This is why the Commission is publishing a range of guidance that will give
individuals, businesses, employers and public authorities the information that
they need to understand the Act, to exercise their rights and to meet their
responsibilities in the most straightforward way.
This Technical Guidance outlines the requirements of the Equality Act 2010 for
schools in relation to the provision of education and access to benefits, facilities
or services, both educational and non-educational. It provides an authoritative,
comprehensive and technical guide to the detail of the law.
The Guidance is aimed at those working in schools, lawyers, advocates, courts
and tribunals, and everyone who needs to understand the law in depth or to
apply it in practice.
This Guidance has been discussed and consulted upon with representatives
from across the education sector, including school leaders, teachers and other
stakeholders, government departments and trade unions. Their contributions
have enriched and improved the text, and the Commission is grateful for their
help.
More information about the full range of Equality Act guidance can be found on
our website.
9
Technical guidance for schools in England
Background
The Equality Act 2010 ('the Act') consolidates and replaces the previous
discrimination legislation for England, Scotland and Wales. The Act covers
discrimination based on age, disability, gender reassignment, marriage and civil
partnership, pregnancy and maternity, race, religion or belief, sex and sexual
orientation. These categories are known in the Act as 'protected characteristics'.
An important purpose of the Act is to unify the legislation outlawing discrimination
against people with different protected characteristics where this is appropriate.
There are, however, some significant differences and exceptions, which this
Technical Guidance explains.
As well as consolidating existing law, the Act makes discrimination unlawful in
some circumstances not covered previously. Discrimination in most areas of
activity is now unlawful subject to certain exceptions. These areas of activity
include, for example, employment and other areas of work, education, housing,
the provision of services, the exercise of public functions and membership of
associations.
Different areas of activity are covered under different parts of the Act. An
education provider will have duties under more than one Part of the Act, where,
for example, it employs people or provides services, as well as in relation to its
role in providing education to students.
Status of the Technical Guidance
The Equality and Human Rights Commission ('the Commission') has prepared
and issued this Technical Guidance on the basis of its powers to provide
information and advice under s13 of the Equality Act 2006 (EA 2006).
This Guidance is not a statutory code issued under EA 2006, s14, but it may be
used as evidence in legal proceedings. If education providers follow this
Guidance, it may help them to avoid the court making an adverse decision in
such proceedings.
10
Technical guidance for schools in England
Scope of the Technical Guidance
This Technical Guidance covers discrimination in schools, as set out in Chapter
1 of Part 6 of the Act.
Chapter 1 of Part 6 is based on the principle that people should not be
discriminated against in schools provision on the basis of any of the protected
characteristics set out in the Act, when seeking admission to schools, when
accessing the education and benefits provided, or by being excluded from
school. This does not necessarily mean that education providers should treat
everybody in exactly the same way: in some circumstances, an education
provider will need to deliver in a range of ways to meet the differing needs of
people so that all receive the same standard of education as others as far as this
is possible. This Technical Guidance explains the steps that education providers
should take to ensure that they do not discriminate.
The Guidance sets out the Act's requirements of schools in relation to provision
of education and access to benefits, facilities or services. These cover all of the
services, facilities and benefits, both educational and non-educational, that the
school provides, or offers to provide, for pupils.
Guidance available online at the Commission website explains the operation of
the public sector equality duty as it applies to schools for England:
The duties of schools as employers, bodies that carry out public functions and
service providers are not covered by Part 6 of the Act. They are set out in the
separate Employment Code of Practice and the Code of Practice on Services,
Public Functions and Associations, available online at
This Technical Guidance applies to England. There is separate Technical
Guidance that applies to schools in Scotland and guidance for schools in Wales.
Education provided outside Britain may be covered by the Act.
Role of the Commission
The Equality and Human Rights Commission was set up under the Equality Act
2006 to work towards the elimination of unlawful discrimination, and to promote
equality and human rights.
The Commission has duties to promote human rights and equality, and to
provide advice about the law, so that discrimination is avoided. It also has
powers to enforce discrimination law in some circumstances.
11
Technical guidance for schools in England
Human rights
Public authorities, and other organisations when they are carrying out 'functions
of a public nature', have a duty under the Human Rights Act 1998 (HRA) not to
act incompatibly with rights under the European Convention for the Protection of
Fundamental Rights and Freedoms ('the Convention').
Courts and tribunals have a duty to interpret primary legislation (including the
Equality Act 2010) and secondary legislation in a way that is compatible with the
Convention rights, unless it is impossible to do SO. This duty applies to courts
and tribunals whether or not a public authority is involved in the case. So, in any
discrimination claim or any claim relating to the public sector equality duty arising
under the Act, the court or tribunal must ensure that it interprets the Act
compatibly with the Convention rights, where it can.
Because of the close relationship between human rights and equality, it is good
practice for those exercising public functions to consider equality and human
rights together when drawing up equality or human rights policies.
What is this Technical Guidance about?
This Technical Guidance explains the legal obligations set out in Chapter 1 of
Part 6 of the Equality Act 2010. The provisions in Chapter 1 and explained in this
Guidance apply to all schools in England, irrespective of how they are managed
or funded.
Schools have legal obligations under the Act not to discriminate against, harass
or victimise pupils. Schools had legal obligations under previous equality
legislation. The Act provides a single legal framework and a more streamlined
law that is meant to be more effective at tackling disadvantage and
discrimination. Because the Act harmonises the previous equality legislation,
schools are already carrying out much of what is required of them. The main
changes for schools are:
new protected characteristics, including:
gender reassignment; and
pregnancy and maternity;
new positive action provisions;
new provisions protecting pupils from victimisation for action taken by their
parent or sibling;
12
Technical guidance for schools in England
a new form of disability discrimination - 'discrimination arising from
disability'; and
extension of the reasonable adjustment duty to include auxiliary aids and
services (effective from September 2012).
This Technical Guidance provides an overview of the obligations that the Act
places on schools in relation to pupils and the provision of education, referred to
throughout as the 'schools provisions'. It will help school leaders to understand
and comply with the Act, and it suggests steps that schools may wish to take to
ensure they are meeting their obligations under the Act. It will help pupils and
their parents to understand obligations under the Act. It will also be useful to
others who work with the Act such as lawyers, other advisers, courts and
tribunals.
The focus of this Technical Guidance is on the practical implementation of the
Act in schools. It includes examples showing how the Act applies in contexts that
will be familiar to schools. It also gives answers to frequently asked questions
(FAQs).
Who is this Technical Guidance for?
This Technical Guidance is for local authorities, governing bodies, head
teachers, special educational needs coordinators (SENCOs) and staff at all
primary and secondary schools (including, in England, academies and free
schools), pupil referral units (PRUs) and independent schools, as well as for
parents and pupils.
How to read this Guidance
Chapter 1 gives an overview of the schools provisions of the Act.
Chapter 2 explains the Act's provisions in relation to schools admissions.
Chapter 3 explains the Act's provisions in relation to schools providing
education and access to benefits, facilities and services for pupils.
Chapter 4 explains the Act's provisions in relation to exclusions from
school.
Chapter 5 explains the key concepts in the Act, including different forms of
discrimination, harassment and victimisation.
Chapter 6 explains the duty to make reasonable adjustments for disabled
pupils.
13
Technical guidance for schools in England
Chapter 7 explains the positive action provisions of the Act.
Chapter 8 deals with dispute resolution and enforcement of the Act.
Chapter 9 explains exceptions that apply generally across the Act and
how they apply specifically to schools.
14
Technical guidance for schools in England
Chapter 1 | Overview of the
schools provisions of the Act
Who has legal obligations?
1.1 All schools in England, irrespective of how they are funded or managed,
have obligations under the Act. This includes:
Schools maintained by a local authority, including community, foundation,
voluntary-aided and voluntary-controlled schools
Special schools not maintained by a local authority
Independent schools
Independent educational institutions (in England)
State-funded schools such as academies, city technology colleges (CTCs),
free schools and studio schools
Pupil referral units
ss85(7), 89
1.2 Local authorities have obligations under the schools provisions where they
are the responsible body for the school, for example if they are the
admissions authority for the school.
1.3 Although local authorities carry out many education-related functions, most
of these are not covered by the education provisions of the Act in Part 6,
but by Part 3, which places obligations on service providers and those
carrying out public functions.
1.4 Local authorities also have a number of strategic duties arising from the
Children and Families Act 2014 (CFA) towards disabled children, which,
due to the co-operation duty (s28, CFA), also apply to schools. Hence a
local authority must ensure that it:
Identifies all children and young people in its area who have a disability
(s22, CFA);
Integrate education provision and training provision with health care
provision and social care provision, where it thinks this would promote the
well-being of children or young people in its area who have a disability;
(s25, CFA)
Make joint commissioning arrangements about education, health and
social care provision for children in its area who have a disability (s26,
CFA);
15
Technical guidance for schools in England
Keep under review the education and training provision and social care
provision made in its area for children and young people who have a
disability (s27, CFA);
Publish information regarding provision available in its area regarding
education, health and care provision, other educational or training
provision, transport, and preparation for adult life for children and young
people who have a disability (s30, CFA); and
Make arrangements for children and young people in its area with a
disability, and the parents of these children, to be provided with advice and
information about matters relating to the disabilities of the children or
young people concerned (s32, CFA).
1.5 Nursery schools maintained by a local authority and nursery education
provided by any school (either maintained or independent) have the same
obligations as schools. Other early years education providers (such as
private nurseries, childminders, accredited childminder networks,
preschools, playgroups and SureStart children's centres) are covered by
Part 3 of the Act as service providers.
ss85(7), 89
1.6 For further information, the Services Code is available on our website.
Who is responsible for ensuring that a school
does not breach the Act?
1.7 It is the responsible body of a school that is liable for any breaches of the
Act. The responsible body for a school maintained by a local authority is the
local authority or the governing body. Which body is responsible in any
situation will depend on how responsibilities are split between the local
authority and governing body. For example, if the local authority is the
admissions authority for a school, then it will be the responsible body in
relation to any claim under the Act in connection with admissions. However,
the governing body is likely to be the responsible body in relation to a claim
about exclusions.
1.8 The responsible body for an independent school, academy or free school is
the proprietor.
s85(9)
16
Technical guidance for schools in England
1.9 The responsible body for a school is liable for the actions of its employees
and agents of the school unless it can show that it took 'all reasonable
steps' to prevent the discrimination, harassment or victimisation from taking
place. This responsibility does not extend to cover the actions of pupils
beyond the responsibility that a school already has for the actions of its
pupils. In some circumstances, an employee or agent of the school may be
personally liable for acts of discrimination, harassment or victimisation.
This is explained in more detail in Chapter 5.
1.10 Throughout this Technical Guidance, the term 'school' is used for ease to
refer to anyone who has duties under the schools provisions of the Act.
Who is protected?
1.11 The Act protects pupils from discrimination and harassment based on
'protected characteristics'.
ss85, 89
1.12 The protected characteristics under the schools provisions are:
Disability
Gender reassignment
Pregnancy and maternity
Race
Religion or belief
Sex
Sexual orientation
Protected characteristics are explained in more detail in Chapter 5.
1.13 The Act protects a person applying for admission to a school, a pupil at a
school and, in some circumstances, a former pupil of a school.
What is unlawful?
1.14 It is unlawful for a school to discriminate against an applicant or pupil in
relation to:
Admissions
The provision of education
Access to any benefit, facility or service
Exclusions
Any other detriment
17
Technical guidance for schools in England
1.15 It is also unlawful for a school to harass or victimise an applicant or pupil.
Schools' obligations in relation to each of these areas are explained in more
detail in later chapters of this Technical Guidance.
What is unlawful discrimination?
1.16 The forms of discrimination that are unlawful under the school provisions
are:
Direct discrimination (including discrimination based on perception or
association)
Indirect discrimination
Discrimination arising from disability
Failure to make reasonable adjustments (for disabled people)
Pregnancy and maternity discrimination
Unlawful discrimination is explained in more detail in Chapter 5.
1.17 Any reference to 'discrimination' in this Technical Guidance is a reference
to all of these forms of discrimination unless specifically indicated
otherwise.
What else is unlawful?
Harassment
1.18 A school must not harass a pupil or applicant. There are three different
types of harassment that are unlawful under the Act:
a) harassment related to a 'relevant protected characteristic',
b) sexual harassment, and
c) less favourable treatment because of a submission to, or a rejection of,
sexual harassment and harassment related to sex.
1.19 The harassment provisions of the Act do not protect pupils from
harassment by other pupils. However, the provisions on discrimination
mean that schools have an obligation to ensure that bullying by pupils that
is related to a protected characteristic is treated with the same level of
seriousness as any other form of bullying.
s26
1.20 Harassment is explained in more detail in Chapter 5.
18
Technical guidance for schools in England
Victimisation
1.21 A school must not victimise a pupil or applicant. It is unlawful victimisation
for a school to subject a pupil, or an applicant for admission as a pupil, to a
detriment because he or she has carried out a 'protected act' (see
paragraph 1.24) or because the school believes that he or she has carried
out a protected act or may do so in the future.
s27
1.22 It is also unlawful victimisation for a school to subject a parent, or other
member of the public, to a detriment because he or she has carried out a
protected act or the school believes that he or she has done or may do so
in the future, but this is covered by Part 3 rather than Part 6 of the Act.
s27
1.23 It is also unlawful victimisation for a school to subject a pupil to a detriment
because his or her parent or sibling has carried out a 'protected act', or
because the school believes that he or she has done or may do so in the
future.
s86
1.24 A 'protected act' is any of the following:
Bringing proceedings under the Act
Giving evidence or information in connection with proceedings brought
under the Act
Doing anything else for the purposes of, or in connection with, the Act
Making an express or implicit allegation that another person has done
something in breach of the Act (whether or not the allegation is later
dropped)
Are there any exceptions to the schools
provisions?
1.25 The Act contains exceptions that apply across the Act and therefore apply
to schools, exceptions that apply only to schools and exceptions that apply
only to certain types of school.
1.26 Exceptions that apply across the Act and are not specific to schools are
explained in Chapter 9.
1.27 The exceptions that apply only to schools are explained in Chapter 3 and
relate to:
Curriculum content
Collective worship
19
Technical guidance for schools in England
1.28 Exceptions that apply to certain types of school can be summarised as
follows and are explained in detail in later chapters.
Single-sex schools are allowed to admit pupils of only one sex (see
Chapter 2).
Mixed schools with single-sex boarding are allowed to offer boarding to
only one sex (see Chapter 2).
Schools with a designated religious ethos are allowed to discriminate on
the grounds of religion or belief in admissions, and in the provision of
education or access to any benefit, facility or service (see Chapters 2 and
3).
Selective schools are permitted to refuse admission to disabled applicants
who fail the admissions process even if the failure is as a consequence of
something arising from their disability (see Chapter 2).
Residential schools are permitted, in some circumstances, to restrict
access to communal accommodation based on sex or gender
reassignment (see Chapter 9).
Charity schools are permitted to provide benefits only to people with a
particular protected characteristic (see Chapter 9).
Positive action
1.29 The positive action provisions of the Act permit schools to take
proportionate steps to help particular groups of pupils to overcome
disadvantages that are linked to a protected characteristic. Where this
results in more favourable treatment of pupils with a particular protected
characteristic, this is lawful provided that the requirements of the positive
action provisions are met. The Act defines the circumstances in which a
school may take positive action to overcome disadvantage, to meet
different needs or to increase participation of people with a particular
protected characteristic.
1.30 Positive action is explained in detail in Chapter 7.
20
Technical guidance for schools in England
Interaction with other legislation and
responsibilities
1.31 Nothing in the Act takes precedence over any other statutory duties that
schools may have. In carrying out their obligations under the Act, schools
must ensure that they comply with all other legal requirements placed upon
them. However, the existence of other legislative provisions and
responsibilities does not necessarily provide a defence in a claim under the
Act. Schools are expected to take whatever action is necessary to ensure
that they fulfil their responsibilities both under the Act and under any other
legislation that applies to them.
Frequently asked questions (FAQs)
1.32 A youth club run by a voluntary organisation uses a school premises
for its sessions. Some of the school staff are volunteers at the youth
club. Is the school responsible for the actions of the youth club and
its volunteers?
It is the youth club that is responsible, not the school. The youth club would
have duties under the 'services provider provisions' of the Act. It is immaterial
that the school staff are volunteers rather than paid by the club; what is
relevant is that it is the youth club providing the service, not the school.
1.33 While on a work placement, a pupil is discriminated against by her
placement provider. Is the school responsible?
It is the work placement provider that would be responsible for this. The work
placement provider has duties under the 'work provisions' of the Act. The
school is responsible only for finding and offering work placement
opportunities, and for not discriminating in doing so. However, a school may be
legally responsible for discrimination, harassment or victimisation by a
placement provider where they could have taken steps to prevent it and have
not done so. This is addressed in Chapter 5.
1.34 Does a school have obligations under the Act to parents?
Services that a school provides to people other than pupils are likely to be
subject to the 'services provisions' of Part 3 of the Act. This would include
services to parents or other members of the community. Where a pupil uses
the school's services as a member of the public rather than as a pupil, then
that relationship would be covered by Part 3 of the Act.
21
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
A school with a swimming pool opens the pool to members of the public
on a Saturday morning. A pupil of the school uses the pool with his
parents on a Saturday morning. In this context, he would be covered by
the services provisions of Part 3 of the Act rather than by the schools
provisions of Part 6 of the Act. His parents would also be covered by
Part 3 of the Act.
A deaf parent who communicates through British Sign Language (BSL)
attends a parent's evening. The school is under a duty (under Part 3 of
the Act) to make reasonable adjustments to enable the parent to
communicate with school staff and therefore to benefit from the parent's
evening. This might include the school arranging and paying for a BSL
interpreter.
1.35 Does a school have obligations under the Act to pupils from outside
of Britain?
The Act places legal obligations on all schools in England, and it is immaterial
where the pupils are from and how long they are at the school.
1.36 Does the Act cover education or school activities that take place
outside of Britain?
If a school provides education or school activities for its pupils that take place
abroad then this would be covered by the Act.
Example:
A pupil is discriminated against by a member of school staff whilst on a school
trip to France. In this case, the Act is likely still to apply even though the
discrimination took place in another country.
22
Technical guidance for schools in England
Chapter 2
Admissions
How do the Act's requirements fit in with
admissions legislation?
2.1 Nothing in the Act requires a school to act in a way that is inconsistent with
other legal obligations relating to schools admissions.
2.2 Maintained schools are subject to those provisions in the School Standards
and Framework Act 1988 and the Admissions Codes (produced by the
Department for Education and the Welsh Assembly Government) made
under them that set out the statutory regime for school admissions. These
provisions sit alongside the Equality Act provisions and maintained schools
must comply with both.
2.3 Schools such as academies, free schools, independent schools and non-
maintained special schools must comply with the Equality Act irrespective
of whether or not they are required to comply with admissions legislation
and guidance.
2.4 Local authorities are responsible for coordinating school admissions and for
ensuring that there are adequate school places in their areas, but each
allocates places only at the schools for which it is the admissions authority.
The admissions authority is the body responsible for setting and applying a
school's admission arrangements.
2.5 The Act does not prohibit schools from setting and applying admissions
criteria. However, admissions criteria must not discriminate against
applicants with a particular protected characteristic and, if necessary,
reasonable adjustments should be made for disabled applicants.
Examples and terminology used in this section
2.6 The examples and case studies used in this section are intended to
illustrate solely how the Act applies in relation to admissions. The examples
do not deal with any other matters that may affect a school's admissions
policies, including admissions legislation. In some situations, the treatment
may be both a breach of admissions legislation and the Act.
2.7 In this section, the term 'school' includes the admissions authority for a
school, which may be the local authority. The term 'pupil' is used to refer to
all who are protected by these provisions, including applicants for
admission to a school. Unless otherwise stated, 'school' is used to refer to
all types of school, including maintained schools, free schools, academies
and independent schools.
23
Technical guidance for schools in England
Who is the responsible body?
2.8 The responsible body in relation to admissions varies depending on the
type of school.
2.9 For a school maintained by a local authority, the responsible body in
relation to admissions is the admissions authority for the school. The
admissions authority is responsible for setting and applying a school's
admission arrangements. The following table sets out the admissions
authority (and therefore the responsible body in relation to admissions) for
maintained schools.
School
Admissions authority
Community school
Local authority
Voluntary controlled school
Local authority
Foundation school
Governing body
Voluntary aided school
Governing body
2.10 For schools not maintained by a local authority, including independent
schools, academies and free schools, the responsible body for admissions
purposes is the proprietor.
s85(9)
What does the Act say about admissions?
2.11 The Act says that it is unlawful for the responsible body of a school to
discriminate against or victimise a person:
a) in the arrangements it makes for deciding who is offered admission as a
pupil,
b) as to the terms on which it offers to admit the person as a pupil, or
c) by not admitting the person as a pupil.
2.12 The Act also provides that it is unlawful for a school to harass a person who
has applied for admission as a pupil.
s85(1), (4)
2.13 For single-sex schools, there are exceptions for admissions to enable them
to restrict admission to pupils of only one sex.
Sch 11, para 1
24
Technical guidance for schools in England
2.14 For schools with a religious character, there is an exception for admissions
to enable them to discriminate in relation to religion and belief. For schools
that are subject to the Admissions Code (maintained schools and
academies), this would apply only when a school is oversubscribed and
admissions criteria are being applied.
Sch 11, para 5
Arrangements for deciding who is offered
admission
2.15 'Arrangements' in this context mean all of the policies, criteria and practices
used in all of the stages of the admissions process and all admissions
decisions.
2.16 'Arrangements' include:
Admissions policies
Drawing up of admissions criteria
Application of admissions criteria
Information about the school, including marketing material
Open events and schools visits
Application forms
Decision-making processes
Interviews (where permitted)
Tests (where permitted)
Information about the school and about the application
process
2.17 Information that a school provides to pupils or prospective pupils, including
advertisements, prospectuses, emails, and information on notice boards
and websites, should not suggest that a school might discriminate or that
applications from people with certain protected characteristics would not be
welcome. If they do so, this will be direct discrimination.
25
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
An independent religious school has information on its website indicating that
it does not tolerate homosexuality. This could constitute direct sexual
orientation discrimination.
2.18 In relation to disabled people, schools should ensure that the information
and application process is accessible, and should make reasonable
adjustments as necessary.
Open events and school visits
2.19 When schools hold open events and offer school visits, they should offer
them to all potential applicants irrespective of any protected characteristics.
If necessary, they should make reasonable adjustments for disabled
applicants or disabled parents.
Examples:
-
A school will allow visits to be made to it only by parents of pupils from
the nearest primary school even though there are several primary
schools in the catchment area. This primary school is attended by
mainly white British pupils, whereas the other primary schools in the
area have a higher proportion of eastern European pupils. This
requirement of attendance at the nearest primary school is likely to
amount to indirect race discrimination unless it can be objectively
justified.
A free school offers school visits to parents interested in applying to the
school. A parent with a strong foreign accent and poor English
telephones the school, asking for an appointment for a school visit. He is
told that school visits are not available, because the school secretary
has been asked to offer appointments only to British parents. This would
be direct race discrimination against the parent under Part 3 of the Act,
because he is member of the public rather than a pupil.
2.20 Justification is explained in Chapter 5.
26
Technical guidance for schools in England
Admissions criteria
2.21 Although the use of admissions criteria is permitted, a school must not
discriminate, either directly or indirectly, against anyone with a protected
characteristic.
2.22 Having criteria that exclude people with a particular protected characteristic
will be direct discrimination, which is always unlawful.
2.23 Indirect discrimination may occur if admissions criteria exclude a greater
proportion of pupils with particular protected characteristics, unless the
criteria can be shown to be a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate
aim.
This concept is explained in Chapter 5.
2.24 Admissions criteria must not discriminate against disabled people because
of something arising as a consequence of their disability, unless the criteria
can be shown to be a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.
This is explained further in Chapter 5.
Terms on which the school offers to admit the
person as a pupil
2.25 Terms of admission should not discriminate against a person because of
their protected characteristic. In general, a school should not offer
admission to a person with a particular protected characteristic on terms
that are less favourable than those that are, or which would be, offered to
someone without that protected characteristic.
27
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
-
A selective school requires girls to achieve a higher pass mark than
boys. This is sex discrimination.
A disabled pupil is allowed to attend school only on a part-time basis
because the school does not have the resources to provide the pupil
with the support he requires on a full-time basis. This would be
discrimination arising from disability, unless it can be justified.
Not admitting the person as a pupil
2.26 It is unlawful for a school to reject an applicant because of a protected
characteristic, for example because he or she is gay or because his or her
parent is gay. As explained, single-sex schools are allowed to restrict
admission to pupils of only one sex (see paragraph 2.13) and schools with
a religious character are allowed to have admissions criteria that give
preference to members of their own religion (see paragraph 2.14).
2.27 If a person is refused a place at a school because he or she does not meet
the admissions criteria as a result of a protected characteristic, this could
amount to indirect discrimination. In the case of a disabled applicant who
does not meet the admissions criteria because of something arising as a
consequence of his or her disability, then this could amount to
discrimination arising from disability. In both cases, the school would need
to be able to justify the application of the criteria as a proportionate means
of achieving a legitimate aim.
This is explained further in Chapter 5.
2.28 A school must also consider its duty to make reasonable adjustments for
disabled applicants before rejecting a disabled applicant.
28
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
A school requires the applicant's family to have lived in the catchment
area for at least three years. Unless the policy can be 'objectively
justified', this could be indirect discrimination against children from a
Gypsy and Traveller family because they are less likely to have lived in
the same area for a period of three years. The school could operate
some flexibility in relation to this requirement to ensure that such
discrimination does not occur.
An academy requires applicants to demonstrate that they played sport
for their primary school. This is likely to be indirect discrimination against
applicants with a physical disability who are less likely to have played
competitive sport, unless the school can show that this is a proportionate
means of achieving a legitimate aim.
The admissions tutor for an independent school interviews an applicant
who has cerebral palsy, which makes her speech unclear. The tutor
assumes that the applicant also has learning difficulties and refuses to
admit her, because he thinks she will be unable to cope with the highly
academic environment of the school. This would be direct disability
discrimination.
Selective schools and academic ability
2.29 Independent schools and independent educational institutions are permitted
to select some or all of their pupils by reference to general or special ability
or aptitude, with a view to admitting only pupils of high ability or aptitude.
2.30 Maintained schools can operate selective admissions arrangements where
these are permitted under the School Standards and Framework Act 1998.
2.31 Provided that the way in which ability is assessed is not discriminatory, this
is not unlawful under the Act. The means of assessing academic ability
should be the same irrespective of any protected characteristic that the
applicant may have and the standard required should also be the same. So
if applicants are required to sit an entrance exam, then this should be the
same exam for all applicants and the pass mark required should be the
same for all applicants. Assessment questions that assume uniformity in
pupils' cultural, linguistic, religious or lifestyle experiences could amount to
unlawful indirect discrimination, because pupils with certain protected
characteristics may be disproportionately disadvantaged by such questions.
29
Technical guidance for schools in England
2.32 A school that is using a permitted form of selection is not discriminating by
applying this form of selection to disabled children who apply for admission,
provided that it complies with its duty to make reasonable adjustments for
disabled applicants during the assessment process. The reasonable
adjustments duty does not require a school to offer a lower pass mark to
applicants with learning difficulties.
Sch 11, para 8
Examples:
-
A selective school assesses applicants' academic ability by setting an
exam. An applicant with a visual impairment requests the paper in a
large font size. This is not provided and, as a consequence, he fails the
exam and is not offered a place at the school. This would be a failure to
make reasonable adjustments and discrimination.
A girl with learning difficulties applies to go to a school that selects its
intake on the basis of academic ability. She is provided with reasonable
adjustments, but still fails the entrance test. She is refused admission.
Although her poor performance in the entrance test was as a direct
consequence of her disability and would appear to be discrimination
arising from a disability, the refusal to admit her would not be unlawful,
because it is a result of a permitted form of selection.
The parents of a 12-year-old boy apply for him to go a selective school.
He passes the entrance test, but when the school hears that he has
learning and behaviour difficulties, it refuses him admission. This refusal
is not based on a permitted form of selection and therefore is likely to be
unlawful.
Schools with a religious character or ethos
2.33 A school with a religious character or ethos is a maintained school that has
been designated as a school having such a religious character by an order
made by the Secretary of State, or an independent school the entry for
which on the register of independent schools for England specifies that the
school has a religious ethos.
30
Technical guidance for schools in England
2.34 The Act permits such schools to discriminate on the grounds of religion or
belief in admissions. So such schools are allowed to use admissions criteria
that discriminate against pupils because of religion or belief and, for
example, give preference to applicants from a particular religion or with
particular beliefs. For schools that are subject to the Admissions Code
(maintained schools and academies, this would apply only when a school is
oversubscribed and admissions criteria are being applied.
Sch 11, para 5
Example:
A voluntary-aided Church of England school has an oversubscription criterion
that states that preference will be given to applicants who have been
confirmed in the Church. This is lawful under the Act.
Single-sex schools
2.35 Single-sex schools are allowed to admit pupils of only one sex without this
being unlawful sex discrimination. In this context, a single-sex school
includes those schools that admit pupils of the opposite sex, but the
admission of whom to the school is exceptional or whose numbers are
comparatively small and their admission is confined to particular courses or
classes.
Sch 11, para 1
Example:
A girls' school admits boys to its sixth form to study A-levels. It is still
regarded as a single-sex school.
2.36 Where a school admits pupils of the opposite sex, it is permitted to confine
those pupils to particular courses or classes. So, in the example above, it
would be lawful for the school to confine the boys to certain A-level
subjects.
2.37 This exception applies only to admissions and does not apply to the
provision of education or access to any benefit, facility or service, or to
exclusions.
31
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
In the example above, the school would be acting unlawfully if it did not allow
the male pupils access to the school library on the same terms as it did the
female pupils.
Single-sex boarding at schools
2.38 Mixed-sex boarding schools are allowed to restrict admission as a boarder
to pupils of only one sex without this being unlawful sex discrimination.
Schools that offer boarding to only one sex are also allowed to discriminate
against pupils of the opposite sex in relation to boarding facilities. This
exception applies to schools that offer boarding only to one sex and also to
schools that admit as boarders only a small number of pupils of the
opposite sex, as compared with the number of other pupils admitted as
boarders.
Sch 11, para 2
Frequently asked questions (FAQs)
2.39 Are independent schools that interview prospective pupils and their
parents allowed to ask questions about family background?
Asking questions about an applicant's background and family that are not
justified may result in irrelevant information being obtained. If this information is
then taken into account in the selection process, this could lead to
discrimination.
Example:
A school asks a black applicant when his family moved to Britain. This is not a
relevant question and, if the information is used in the decision-making, this
could constitute race discrimination.
2.40 Can a school that wants to know the religion of all of its pupils, so that
it can ensure that it includes all relevant religious events and festivals
in the school calendar, ask for details of a person's religion on the
admissions application form?
32
Technical guidance for schools in England
Asking questions that are not relevant to the admissions application, such as
questions about an applicant's religion, could lead to discrimination if this
information is then used in the selection process. It is probably more
appropriate to ask for this information once pupils have been offered a place,
so that there is no way that the information could influence the admissions
decision-making. Schools with a religious character are able to ask for
information on an admissions application form because they are allowed to
give preference to members of their own religion if they are oversubscribed.
2.41 Can an independent school charge different rates of fees for home
pupils and overseas pupils?
If a school charges different rates for the same service, then this would be
indirect race discrimination. However, if the school is offering a different
service, for example longer terms for overseas students, then this could be
justified.
2.42 Can a co-educational selective school that wants to keep the ratio of
boys to girls to 50:50 set different pass marks for boys and girls in
order to keep the balance?
Setting fixed proportions of boys or girls and different pass marks for boys and
girls to achieve this in a co-educational school is sex discrimination.
33
Technical guidance for schools in England
Chapter 3 I Providing education
and access to benefits, facilities
and services for pupils
.What does the Act say?
3.1 The Act says that it is unlawful for a school to discriminate against or
victimise a pupil:
in the way in which it provides education for the pupil;
in the way in which it affords the pupil access to a benefit, facility or
service;
by not providing education for the pupil;
by not affording the pupil access to a benefit, facility or service; or
by subjecting the pupil to any other detriment.
The Act also provides that it is unlawful for a school to harass a pupil.
s85(2), (3), (5)
3.2 There are exceptions to these provisions that cover the content of the
curriculum, collective worship and certain exceptions for schools with a
religious character or ethos. These are explained in paragraphs 3.22-3.29.
What is covered?
3.3 A school's obligation to pupils covers everything that a school provides for
pupils and goes beyond just the formal education it provides. It covers all
school activities such as extracurricular and leisure activities, afterschool
and homework clubs, sports activities and school trips, as well as school
facilities such as libraries and IT facilities.
34
Technical guidance for schools in England
Provision of education and access to a benefit,
facility or service
3.4 Most discrimination in schools is unintentional and may come about
because of rigid policies or practices. Reviewing all practices and policies
will help a school to ensure that it does not discriminate, as well as help it to
comply with the public sector equality duty
3.5 The following paragraphs highlight some of the activities covered by the
schools provisions, but are not intended to be an exhaustive list.
Policies and procedures, such as those covering
timetabling, school uniform, and behaviour and
discipline
3.6 Schools must ensure that all policies and procedures do not discriminate
against pupils. Policies that indirectly discriminate against pupils with a
particular protected characteristic can be justified only if they are a
proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.
This concept is explained in Chapter 5.
35
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
-
A school uniform policy states that girls are permitted to wear small stud
earrings, but boys cannot wear earrings at all. This may be sex
discrimination.
A school has a policy that if a pupil breaks the school rules on three
occasions, he or she will automatically be given a detention. Some
disabled pupils, such as those with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), autistic spectrum disorders or learning difficulties, are much
more likely to break the school rules than other pupils. Rigid application
of this policy is likely to amount to indirect disability discrimination
because, where a reasonable adjustment has not been made; a school
will find it very difficult to justify the treatment as a proportionate means
of achieving a legitimate aim.
3.7 Schools must also ensure that any policies that are designed to protect
pupils do so without discrimination. The Act does not cover pupil-to-pupil
bullying, but a school is required to ensure that it does not discriminate in
the way in which it deals with bullying in school. Bullying because of a
protected characteristic should be dealt with very seriously and there
should be no differentiation between the seriousness with which a school
deals with bullying for reasons arising from a protected characteristic and
the bullying for reasons not connected with a protected characteristic.
36
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
A school has a policy covering racial bullying and any pupil who
participates in racial bullying is excluded for at least one day. However,
the school does not have a policy dealing with homophobic bullying and
pupils who participate in such bullying are usually given only a
detention. This could lead to direct sexual orientation discrimination
unless the bullying of homosexual pupils was not related to their sexual
orientation.
A pupil who has been bullied by a group of former friends because they
have fallen out is given strong support by the school and the bullying is
dealt with firmly. Another pupil who has suffered similar treatment
because she is from a Roma background is told that she will need to
learn to deal with such things in life and has to toughen up. This would
be direct race discrimination.
All teaching, including curriculum delivery, classes,
practical sessions, field trips and outings, and
homework
3.8 The way in which the curriculum is delivered must not discriminate against
a pupil with a protected characteristic.
37
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
A lesbian pupil undertakes a project charting the history of the gay and
lesbian movement as part of her GCSE coursework. Her teacher tells
her that her topic is inappropriate and that she should keep her personal
life to herself. As a result, the pupil is subsequently given low marks for
her project. This is likely to be direct discrimination because of sexual
orientation.
A teacher does not allow black pupils to use certain equipment in a
woodwork class because he believes that they are more likely to
misbehave and misuse the equipment. This is likely to be direct racial
discrimination.
3.9 The way in which the curriculum is delivered can be used to tackle
stereotyping and inequality. Teaching staff should be encouraged to think
about the way in which they deliver their teaching to ensure that they do not
inadvertently discriminate against pupils.
School trips (educational and non-educational)
3.10 The nature and timing of trips can lead to discrimination if this results in
certain pupils with a protected characteristic being unable to participate, for
example if trips clash with Eid, but not with Easter. Further, the way in
which a trip is organised can lead to discrimination if, for example, the
necessary reasonable adjustments are not made for a disabled pupil. A
school is less likely to discriminate if it plans a trip taking into account the
need to include all pupils irrespective of their protected characteristics
rather than if it arranges a trip and then tries to adapt it to make it inclusive.
38
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
-
A pupil with a visual impairment is told that he will not be able to attend a
school camping trip because he will be unable to take part in many of
the activities. The school does not make any attempt to make the
activities accessible. This is disability discrimination, which the school is
unlikely to be able to justify because of its failure to make reasonable
adjustments.
A school with a number of Jewish pupils ensures that any residential
trips it arranges are at venues that can provide kosher food. If it did not
do this, then religiously observant Jewish pupils might not be able to
participate in the trip, which could constitute indirect discrimination
unless the policy could be objectively justified.
A school arranges a trip to an international rugby match and offers
places on the trip only to male pupils. This would be direct sex
discrimination even if a similar trip to an international netball match were
arranged for female pupils. Restricting the netball trip to female pupils
only would also be direct sex discrimination.
A school plans a trip to a natural history museum. A pupil with Down's
syndrome is excluded from the trip because the school believes that she
will not be able to participate in the activities provided by the museum for
school groups. This is likely to be direct disability discrimination.
3.11 Forward planning will help schools in arranging trips in which all pupils are
able to participate. Offering a range of different trips and activities may also
help the school to ensure that no pupils are excluded from taking part.
39
Technical guidance for schools in England
Tests, assessments and exams
3.12 A school must ensure that any tests, assessments or examinations
arranged by the school do not discriminate against a pupil. Assessment
questions that assume uniformity in pupils' cultural, linguistic, religious or
lifestyle experiences could lead to indirect discrimination, because pupils
with certain protected characteristics may be disproportionately
disadvantaged by such questions. A school must make the necessary
reasonable adjustments for disabled pupils in relation to tests and
assessments. Whilst other bodies, such as general qualifications bodies
(GQBs), may be responsible for external examinations and assessments, a
school will still be responsible for ensuring that the school does not
discriminate when conducting these examinations and assessments. GQBs
have duties under the Act that are not covered in this Guidance.
Examples:
A pupil with Tourette's syndrome is excluded from an exam for
'disturbing' other pupils with involuntary jerking movements and yelling,
which are connected to his disability. The school does not make an
alternative arrangement for him to sit the exam, such as taking the exam
in a separate room. The exclusion from the exam is likely to be
discrimination arising from disability, which the school is unlikely to be
able to justify because it has failed to make reasonable adjustments.
A school uses a question in a maths test that requires an understanding
of cricket scoring. A group of girls complain that they do not understand
how cricket scoring works. This could result in indirect sex
discrimination, on the basis that female pupils are less likely than male
pupils to have a knowledge of cricket scoring, because overall more
males than females watch and play cricket.
Academic and vocational options offered to pupils, such
as GCSE choices and extracurricular options
3.13 Generally, pupils should be offered the same opportunities irrespective of
their protected characteristics. There are, however, exceptions where a
school is carrying out activities under the positive action provisions that are
explained in detail in Chapter 7. Limiting the options available to pupils with
certain protected characteristics can, unless it amounts to such positive
action, be unlawful discrimination.
40
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
Certain subjects, such as engineering, are promoted by a school to male
pupils and others, such as health and social care, are promoted to female
pupils. This could result in direct sex discrimination.
Careers education and information
3.14 A school must not unlawfully discriminate in the way in which it provides
careers education, information, advice or guidance. Making assumptions
about the types of career in which pupils would be interested on the basis
of particular protected characteristics could amount to discrimination.
Example:
To help pupils in making choices for post-16 study, a secondary school sets
up information sessions for pupils on the different academic and non-
academic options. A pupil from a Gypsy and Traveller background is
assigned a session on vocational courses, but is denied the opportunity to
attend a session on academic options, because it is assumed that her way of
life would make these inappropriate for her. This would be direct race
discrimination.
Work experience and work placements
3.15 The allocation of pupils to different types of work placement based on
protected characteristics could constitute discrimination. Pupils' choices of
and opportunities for work experience or work placements should not be
restricted because of a protected characteristic.
3.16 While a school will not normally be responsible for any discrimination that
occurs when a pupil is on work placement, the school will be responsible for
ensuring that there is no discrimination in the way in which work experience
and work placement opportunities are offered. Effective communication
between schools and work placement providers will enable schools to
minimise the chances of discrimination, and ensure that the school is not
liable for aiding discrimination (see Chapter 5).
3.17 Employers providing work opportunities will be subject to the work
provisions of the Act in relation to their treatment of pupils seeking or
undertaking placements.
41
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A male pupil expresses an interest in a work experience placement at a
children's nursery. A teacher tells him that he will be unable to put him
forward for the placement because he believes that the employer would
prefer a female pupil. This would be direct sex discrimination.
Afterschool clubs, and extracurricular leisure and
sporting activities provided by the school
3.18 Where a school provides services or activities to its pupils that are not
strictly educational and which may, in some circumstances, take place
outside of the traditional school day, these are still covered by the school
provisions of the Act. This would include afterschool activities, such as
sporting clubs, and drama and musical productions. The range of activities
offered and the way in which they are offered and delivered must not
discriminate.
Examples:
-
A female pupil in a primary school is told that she will be unable to
continue playing in the school football team because some parents have
complained about the school having a mixed-sex team. This would be
direct sex discrimination.
A school distributes cut-price tickets to rugby matches to male pupils,
but does not offer the tickets to female pupils. This is likely to be direct
sex discrimination.
3.19 Indirect discrimination may occur when pupils with particular protected
characteristics are inadvertently prevented or discouraged from taking part
in certain activities and opportunities.
42
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A school with a significant proportion of Jewish pupils arranges extracurricular
drama sessions on a Saturday morning. This is likely to result in indirect
religion or belief discrimination unless the school can justify holding the
sessions at a time when Jewish pupils may not be able to attend.
If the same school arranges school football matches for Saturday morning,
because this is when the local school league matches are played, this is likely
to be a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim and therefore
lawful.
School facilities, such as classrooms, laboratories,
libraries, IT facilities, school halls and dining halls,
playgrounds, sporting facilities and residential
accommodation for boarders
3.20 The way in which school facilities are provided can lead to discrimination.
Examples:
A school fails to provide appropriate changing facilities for a transsexual
pupil and insists that the pupil uses the boys' changing room even
though she is now living as a girl. This could be indirect gender
reassignment discrimination unless it can be objectively justified. A
suitable alternative might be to allow the pupil to use private changing
facilities, such as the staff changing room or another suitable space.
A school that has a number of Muslim pupils does not provide Halal food
in its canteen, which results in the Muslim pupils being unable to eat
school lunches. This is likely to be indirect religion or belief
discrimination, because the school is unlikely to be able to justify this
action.
3.21 There are specific exceptions in relation to communal accommodation,
which are explained in Chapter 9.
43
Technical guidance for schools in England
What is not covered?
Content of the curriculum
3.22 These obligations do not apply to anything done in connection with the
content of the curriculum. Schools are not restricted in the range of issues,
ideas and materials that they use, and they have the academic freedom to
expose pupils to a range of thoughts and ideas, however controversial.
Even if the content of the curriculum causes offence to pupils with certain
protected characteristics, this will not make it unlawful.
3.23 However, the way in which the curriculum is taught is covered by the non-
discrimination provisions of the Act.
s89(2)
Examples:
A school science curriculum covers evolution. This would not be
-
discrimination on the basis of religion and belief against a pupil whose
religious beliefs include creationism.
-
A school teaches Shakespeare's The Merchant of Venice. This would
not be race or religion or belief discrimination even though the play itself
could be viewed as being hostile towards Jewish people.
While teaching The Merchant of Venice, a teacher at the same school
says words to the effect that: 'Jews are unethical money-lenders, who
only have themselves to blame for the resentment that they experience.'
This could amount to racial or religious discrimination or racial
harassment against a Jewish pupil because the comments relate to how
education is delivered, not the content of the curriculum.
Collective worship
3.24 Acts of worship or other religious observance organised by or on behalf of a
school are not covered by the provisions prohibiting religion or belief
discrimination, whether or not they are part of the curriculum.
44
Technical guidance for schools in England
3.25 Any school can carry out collective worship of a broadly Christian nature
(as maintained schools are required to under Schedule 20 to the School
Standards and Framework Act 1998), or in line with any other religion,
without this being discrimination. Schools are not required to provide
opportunities for separate worship for the different religions and beliefs
represented among their pupils in order to avoid discrimination.
3.26 Schools are not prohibited from organising or participating in acts of
worship or religious observance celebrating any faith. This would not
amount to religion or belief discrimination against pupils of other religions or
of no religion.
Sch 11, para 6
Examples:
-
A school organises an annual nativity play for pupils and a carol concert
to celebrate Christmas. It would not be discrimination if the school were
to fail to hold events to celebrate Diwali for Hindu pupils.
A school that is attended mainly by Christian pupils arranges special
events to celebrate Diwali and Hanukkah. This would be lawful and an
example of good practice.
Schools with religious character or ethos
3.27 The Act permits schools with a religious character or ethos to discriminate
in the provision of education and access to a benefit, facility or service on
the grounds of religion or belief. This means that such schools are
permitted to conduct themselves in a way that discriminates against pupils
on the grounds of religion or belief. This means that a school with a
religious character does not have to make special provision for pupils of a
different faith or incorporate aspects of their faith into its curriculum.
Sch 11, para 5
45
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
-
A Jewish school that provides spiritual instruction or pastoral care from a
rabbi is not discriminating by not making equivalent provision for pupils
from other religious faiths.
-
A Roman Catholic school that organises a visit for pupils to Lourdes is
not discriminating by not arranging a trip to Mecca for two Muslim pupils
who attend the school.
3.28 This exemption does not cover exclusions or subjecting a pupil to any other
detriment, so a pupil cannot be punished or penalised for things that relate
to his or her religion or belief.
Example:
A pupil at a Roman Catholic secondary school tells his class during a
religious education (RE) lesson that he has decided to become a humanist.
The pupil is told to leave the class and is given a detention for being
insubordinate by telling the class that he has renounced the school's faith.
This is likely to be direct discrimination because of religion or belief.
3.29 If a member of school staff conveys his or her beliefs in a way that involves
haranguing or berating a particular pupil or group of pupils, then this would
be unacceptable in any circumstances and would constitute discrimination.
46
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A teacher at a Church of England school tells pupils that homosexuality is
'wrong', and that gay and lesbian people will 'burn in hell' unless they are
'cured of the disease'. A gay pupil in the class is deeply offended and
intimidated by this hostile and degrading language. This may be direct
discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation.
Subjecting a pupil to any other detriment
3.30 The Act says that a school must not discriminate by subjecting a pupil to
'any other detriment. 'Detriment' is not legally defined, but is interpreted
very broadly. It is generally taken to mean some disadvantage and can
include denial of an opportunity or choice, or anything that a reasonable
pupil would consider altered his or her position for the worse. The detriment
need not be physical, academic or disciplinary, for example, but the fact
that the pupil has an unjustified sense of grievance alone would not be
enough.
s85(2) (f)
3.31 Even if a school thinks that it is acting in the best interests of a pupil, its
actions may still amount to a detriment.
47
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A school careers coordinator decides not to offer a placement at a
construction firm to a Muslim pupil because he is worried that the pupil will
find it too hard to 'fit in'. He decides instead to send the pupil for a placement
in retail, which he feels is more appropriate for the pupil, despite the pupil
expressing an interest in working in the built environment. This is likely to be
direct discrimination because of religion and belief.
Pregnancy and maternity discrimination
3.32 A school must not discriminate against a pupil because of her pregnancy or
maternity, or because she is breastfeeding. This means that it is unlawful
for a school to restrict the education, benefits, facilities or services available
to pregnant or breastfeeding pupils, or to restrict the options available to
them. However, it is not unlawful to treat a female pupil more favourably
because of her pregnancy or maternity, or because she is breastfeeding.
So a school can offer pregnant or breastfeeding pupils additional education,
benefits, facilities or services, or offer them in a more flexible or favourable
way than they are offered to other pupils. Schools should avoid making
assumptions about the educational and career aspirations of teenage
mothers.
s17
48
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
A school tells a pregnant school pupil that she will not be able to
continue with practical science lessons because it is a health risk. The
pupil and her parents complain to the school, because there is no
demonstrable health risk in the activities being carried out. This is likely
to be direct discrimination because of pregnancy.
A school offers extra tuition to a pregnant pupil who misses lessons as a
result of attending antenatal appointments. This would not enable a
pupil who had missed lessons for other reasons to claim discrimination
because he or she was required to make up the work in his or her own
time.
Frequently asked questions (FAQs)
3.33 How can a school ensure that the school uniform policy does not
discriminate against any pupils?
Setting different rules for different categories of pupil might result in
discrimination, for example requiring girls to wear clothing that is much more
expensive than that required of boys. Also, applying the policy rigidly without
allowing flexibility for certain pupils might result in discrimination. Examples of
policies that might be discriminatory are:
a general rule of no headgear in school, which requires a Sikh pupil to
remove his turban;
not making reasonable adjustments to school uniform requirements for
disabled pupils who require them, for example not allowing a disabled child
who is allergic to the regulation nylon trousers to wear cotton ones; or
requiring pupils to dress (or not to dress) in a way that conflicts with a
genuine religious requirement of their religion or belief.
Being flexible about how such policies are applied is likely to avoid
discrimination.
Assessing how the uniform policy affects pupils with different protected
characteristics and consulting with parents about the policy will also help a
school to avoid discrimination.
3.34 A school arranges for a pregnant pupil to attend parenting
classes at a local college, but these clash with her GCSE science
classes. Can the school insist that she attends the parenting class?
49
Technical guidance for schools in England
Preventing a pregnant pupil from attending certain classes would be
pregnancy and maternity discrimination. To avoid this, it might be necessary to
offer additional science lessons so that the pupil does not miss out.
3.35 A pupil who gave birth recently wants to stand for the student
representative council. Can the school prevent her from standing on
the grounds that she is not representative of the student body
because she is a teenage mother?
This would be unfavourable treatment because of her maternity, and therefore
pregnancy and maternity discrimination.
50
Technical guidance for schools in England
Chapter 4
Exclusions from
school
How do the Act's requirements fit in with
exclusions legislation?
4.1 Maintained schools are subject to the law relating to exclusions that is
contained in education law and statutory guidance. This sets out the
procedure for excluding pupils and for allowing appeals against exclusions,
and the duties of maintained schools and local authorities to provide
education to excluded pupils. Nothing in the Act conflicts with the other
legal obligations of schools in relation to exclusions. The statutory guidance
on exclusions is clear about the circumstances in which a pupil can lawfully
be excluded and those reasons that would be unlawful. If a school fails to
follow the exclusions guidance, it will not only be acting unlawfully with
regards to exclusions, but might also be breaching the Act. However,
compliance with the exclusions guidance will not necessarily ensure that
the school is complying with the Act.
4.2 Independent schools, including academies, free schools and non-
maintained special schools, must comply with the Act irrespective of
whether or not they are also required to comply with exclusions legislation
and guidance.
4.3 The Act does not prohibit schools from excluding pupils with particular
protected characteristics, but does prohibit schools from excluding pupils
because of their protected characteristics or from discriminating during the
exclusions process. Schools also have a duty to make reasonable
adjustments to the exclusions process for disabled pupils.
Examples and terminology in this chapter
4.4 The examples used in this section are intended to illustrate solely how the
Act applies in relation to exclusions. They do not refer to any other
education legislation, which may also affect the situation portrayed in the
examples. In some situations, the treatment may be both a breach of
education legislation and the Act.
51
Technical guidance for schools in England
What does the Act say about exclusions?
4.5 The Act says that it is unlawful for the responsible body of a school to
discriminate against or victimise a person by excluding him or her from the
school.
s85(2)(e)
What is unlawful under the Act?
4.6 It is unlawful to exclude a pupil because of a protected characteristic. This
covers all types of exclusion, including informal exclusions, fixed-term
exclusions and permanent exclusions, because the Act does not make any
distinction between the different types of exclusion.
4.7 Excluding a pupil because of a protected characteristic would be direct
discrimination.
Example:
A Co-educational school excludes a pupil because he has declared his
intention to undergo gender reassignment and is beginning to present in the
style of the opposite sex. This would be direct gender reassignment
discrimination.
4.8 It is also direct discrimination to exclude a pupil because he or she is
perceived to have a protected characteristic or because he or she is
associated with someone with a protected characteristic.
Example:
The same school excludes the pupil's brother because of his sibling sintention
to undergo gender reassignment. This would be direct gender reassignment
discrimination (by association) even though the pupil himself is not intending
to undergo gender reassignment.
4.9 It is unlawful to exclude a pupil with a particular protected characteristic for
behaviour for which a pupil without that characteristic would not be
excluded.
52
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
On a school trip, several pupils were abusive to the coach driver and swore at
him. The boys were given detentions and not allowed to go on the next school
trip, but were not excluded. However, the girls who swore were excluded,
because their behaviour was not appropriate behaviour for 'young ladies'.
This would be direct sex discrimination, because the female pupils were
excluded for behaviour for which the male pupils were not excluded.
4.10 Behaviour and exclusions policies that result in a higher proportion of pupils
with a particular protected characteristic being excluded are likely to result
in indirect discrimination unless their application can be justified as being a
proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim. This concept is
explained in Chapter 5.
Example:
A school monitors its exclusion rates and discovers that a much higher
proportion of black boys are excluded than any other category of pupil. This
suggests that the practice of excluding for certain behaviours, while applied
equally to all pupils, might disproportionately disadvantage black boys. The
school must ensure that its exclusion policy is a proportionate means of
achieving a legitimate aim in order to ensure that it is not indirectly
discriminating against black boys.
Disabled pupils
4.11 If a disabled pupil is excluded for behaviour connected to his or her
disability, this could be discrimination arising from disability unless the
school can justify the exclusion as being a proportionate means of
achieving a legitimate aim. An exclusion is unlikely to be justified in
circumstances in which the school has not complied with its duty to make
reasonable adjustments for that pupil.
53
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A pupil with autism is excluded for flapping his arms at a supply teacher. The
supply teacher was alarmed by what she perceived to be threatening
behaviour. The reason why the pupil flapped his arms was that the supply
teacher had told him that he could not sit in his normal seat, because it was
not appropriate for the activity that they were doing. This upset the pupil and
caused him to flap his arms in an agitated fashion. The pupil always sat in the
same seat in the classroom and this was recognised as a reasonable
adjustment for his autism by his class teacher. Since the pupil's reaction of
flapping his arms was connected to his disability, the exclusion would be
discrimination arising from disability. Because the school had not advised the
supply teacher of the reasonable adjustment, the school would be unlikely to
be able to justify the discrimination and therefore it would be unlawful.
4.12 The Act requires schools to make reasonable adjustments for disabled
pupils both to the exclusions process and to the disciplinary sanctions
imposed. This might mean applying different sanctions, or applying them in
a different way, to avoid putting a disabled pupil at a substantial
disadvantage in relation to non-disabled pupils.
Example:
A pupil with learning difficulties is excluded for repeatedly getting up from his
seat during lessons and disrupting other pupils. It is the school's policy that
repeated disruptive behaviour is punished by exclusion. The school is under a
duty to make reasonable adjustments to its policy, which might mean
disregarding some of the disruptive behaviour and working with the pupil to
find a way in which to help him to remain in his seat during lessons.
Pregnancy and maternity discrimination
4.13 It is unlawful to exclude a pupil because of her pregnancy or maternity.
Pregnancy and maternity discrimination is explained in more detail in Chapter
5.
54
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A pupil is excluded from her school when it learns that she is pregnant. The
school claims that pregnant pupils will give the school a bad name and that
she will be a bad example to other pupils. This would be direct pregnancy and
maternity discrimination.
Excluded pupils
4.14 Local authorities have duties under the Education Acts to provide education
for excluded pupils. While carrying out these duties, a local authority has
obligations under the Act not to discriminate against, harass or victimise
these pupils.
Frequently asked questions (FAQs)
4.15 An independent school finds out that a pupil has been diagnosed as
autistic. The school did not know that he was autistic when he was
offered a place at the school and would not have offered a place if it
had been aware of the autism. Can the school exclude him on the
basis that he no longer meets the school's admission criteria?
Excluding a pupil because he is autistic would be direct disability
discrimination. The school has a duty to make reasonable adjustments for the
pupil. It is also unlawful for the school to have an admissions policy not to
admit children with autism.
4.16 A Catholic school's admissions criteria enable the school to give
priority to Catholic pupils if it is oversubscribed. A pupil who was
Catholic when he was admitted to the school has announced that he
has turned away from the Catholic faith and that he is now an atheist.
Can the school exclude him on the basis that he no longer meets the
admissions criteria?
Excluding the pupil because of his religion or beliefs would be direct
discrimination irrespective of the fact that he would not have been admitted to
the school if he had been an atheist at the time of his admissions application.
The exception that allows schools with a religious character to give priority to
applicants of their own faith does not apply to exclusions.
55
Technical guidance for schools in England
Chapter 5
Key concepts
What is discrimination?
5.1 The Act consolidates existing law into a single legal framework and while
many of the concepts of discrimination remain the same as in previous
equality legislation, there are some areas that were not previously covered.
This section describes the various types of discrimination and other
prohibited conduct, and how they apply to the schools provisions.
5.2 If a person brings a claim of discrimination, it is unlawful only where the
person claims that he or she has been discriminated against in the doing of
a particular act. Further information is provided about the unlawful acts in
the other sections of this guidance - for example Chapter 2 on admissions,
Chapter 4 on exclusions, etc.
Direct discrimination
5.3 Direct discrimination occurs when a school treats a pupil less favourably
because of a protected characteristic than it treats, or would treat, another
pupil. So a very basic example would be refusing to admit a child to a
school as a pupil because of his or her race, for example because he or
she is Roma.
s13
5.4 It is not possible to justify direct discrimination, so it will always be unlawful.
There are, however, exceptions to the schools provisions that allow, for
example, single-sex schools to admit pupils of only one sex without this
being unlawful direct discrimination.
5.5 In order for someone to show that he or she has been directly discriminated
against, he or she must compare what has happened to him or her to the
treatment that a person without his or her protected characteristic is
receiving, or would receive. So a gay pupil cannot claim that excluding him
for fighting is direct discrimination because of sexual orientation unless he
can show that a straight or bisexual pupil would not be excluded for fighting.
56
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A group of black Caribbean boys are talking loudly and being boisterous in a
science class. The teacher excludes them from the class for their behaviour,
but does not exclude an Asian boy who was also participating. The teacher
cannot provide a reason why the black Caribbean boys have been excluded
when the Asian boy has not. In these circumstances, the treatment is likely to
amount to direct race discrimination.
5.6 A pupil does not need to find an actual person with whom to compare his or
her treatment, but can rely on a 'hypothetical comparator' if he or she can
show that there is evidence that such a person would be treated differently.
Constructing a hypothetical comparator may involve considering elements
of the treatment of several people whose circumstances are similar to those
of the pupil, but not the same. Looking at these elements together, a court
may conclude that the pupil was less favourably treated because of a
protected characteristic than a hypothetical comparator without that
characteristic would have been treated.
57
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A black Caribbean pupil arrives late for the first two classes of term. The
teacher tells him that his late arrival disturbed the concentration of the other
pupils and he is given a detention. In the absence of an actual comparator
(that is, another pupil who had also arrived late, but been treated differently),
the black Caribbean student could compare his treatment to that given to two
white pupils in slightly different circumstances:
-
One white pupil had refused to return to his desk on two occasions and
had disrupted the class, but he was not punished.
-
The other white student played music on his mobile phone during class
on a couple of occasions, which distracted the tutor and the students,
but he was not punished either.
-
Elements of the treatment of these two comparators could allow a court
to construct a hypothetical comparator showing that the black Caribbean
pupil had been treated less favourably because of race.
5.7 Direct discrimination is unlawful, irrespective of the school's motive or
intention and regardless of whether the less favourable treatment of the
pupil is conscious or unconscious. School staff may have prejudices that
they do not even admit to themselves or may act out of good intentions - or
may simply be unaware that they are treating the pupil differently because
of a protected characteristic.
58
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
A teacher decides to deny a pupil with a facial disfigurement a place on
the school debating team, because he believes that other pupils taking
part in the debates will make fun of the pupil and cause him distress.
Although the teacher may think that he has good intentions, denying the
pupil a chance to be on the team is likely to be direct disability
discrimination.
A school organises a trip to the theatre to see a Shakespeare play. The
school decides that a pupil with a hearing impairment would receive
greater benefit from watching a subtitled film version of the play, so it
arranges for her to stay behind at school to watch the film in the
audiovisual suite. The pupil, however, would prefer to attend the theatre
to see the play with her peers. Although the school may consider its
intentions to be good, preventing the pupil from seeing the play at the
theatre is likely to be direct disability discrimination.
5.8 There is no need for someone claiming direct discrimination because of
racial segregation or pregnancy or maternity to find a person to whom to
compare themselves.
Racial segregation is deliberately separating people by race, or colour, or
ethnic or national origin, and will always be unlawful direct discrimination.
s13(5)
To claim pregnancy or maternity discrimination, a female pupil must show
that she has been treated unfavourably because of her pregnancy or
maternity, and she does not have to compare her treatment to the
treatment of someone who was not pregnant or a new mother.
s17
5.9 It is not direct discrimination against a male pupil to offer a female pupil
special treatment in connection with her pregnancy or childbirth.
5.10 It is not direct discrimination against a non-disabled pupil to treat a disabled
pupil more favourably.
59
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A pupil with Asperger's syndrome can sometimes act in a disruptive manner
in class. The school does not take disciplinary action, but uses agreed
strategies to manage his behaviour. A non-disabled pupil who is also
disruptive in class is punished for his behaviour. This difference in treatment
would not be direct discrimination against the non-disabled pupil.
Sex segregation is permitted in certain situations, such as where it is necessary
and appropriate to preserve privacy and decency. The law requires schools to
provide single sex toilet facilities for children over eight and single sex changing
facilities for children over 11. These may be either in sex-segregated communal
facilities or in single-user lockable rooms.
Discrimination based on association
5.11 Direct discrimination also occurs when a pupil is treated less favourably
because of his or her association with another person, such as a sibling,
parent, carer or friend, who has a protected characteristic (other than
pregnancy and maternity). The association with the other person does not
have to be permanent.
60
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
-
A pupil is refused a place at a Catholic primary school because his
parents are a lesbian couple. This is direct sexual orientation
discrimination by association because of the boy's association with his
parents.
-
A group of four pupils are given detention for getting into a fight with
another group of pupils. Three of the pupils from the group that receives
a detention are from a Gypsy and Traveller background; one pupil is
from the settled community. The pupils in the other group, all of whom
are from the settled community, are not punished. The first group could
make a complaint that they have been treated less favourably because
of race - even the pupil from the settled community, because of his or
her association with the pupils from Gypsy and Traveller backgrounds. If
however, the only reason why the first group of pupils were given
detention is because they had been caught fighting on numerous
occasions, or because they had initiated this fight, then this would not be
race discrimination.
Discrimination based on perception
5.12 Direct discrimination also occurs when a pupil is treated less favourably
because he or she is mistakenly thought to have a protected characteristic.
However, this does not apply to pregnancy and maternity.
61
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
A straight male pupil at a secondary school, who has long hair and
wears eyeliner, is not allowed to take part in rugby trials, because the
sports teacher says words to the effect that 'Gay people can't play
rugby.' This is likely to be direct discrimination because of sexual
orientation, even though the pupil is not gay.
-
An independent school has a rapidly growing number of Polish pupils,
about which fact some parents have complained. A pupil is refused
admission to the school because the school wrongly assumes from his
name that he is Polish. This is likely to be direct race discrimination.
Discrimination because of pregnancy and maternity
5.13 It is discrimination to treat a woman (including a female pupil of any age)
less favourably because she is, or has been, pregnant, has given birth in
the last 26 weeks, or is breastfeeding a baby who is 26 weeks or younger.
s17
5.14 It is direct sex discrimination to treat a woman (including a female pupil of
any age) less favourably because she is breastfeeding a child who is more
than 26 weeks old.
s13(6)
62
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
A school reduces the number of GCSEs for which a pregnant pupil is
studying because it believes that she will not be able to cope with as
many subjects now that she is pregnant. The pupil and her parents have
clearly stated that she wants to continue with all of her GCSEs. The
pupil does not receive the choices that would otherwise have been
available to her, and therefore this is likely to constitute pregnancy and
maternity discrimination.
A pregnant pupil applies to do a work placement in a garage. The school
will not allow her to undertake this placement, stating that this is
because it would not be a suitable placement for a girl and certainly not
a pregnant girl. Her pregnancy is only one of the reasons for the
unfavourable treatment, the other being her sex, but this is sufficient to
amount to pregnancy and maternity discrimination.
5.15 The motive of the school is irrelevant and it does not matter if the
unfavourable treatment is conscious or unconscious.
5.16 Pregnancy and maternity discrimination includes unfavourable treatment of
a female pupil based on a stereotype, whether or not the stereotype is
accurate.
Example:
A pupil who has recently given birth is not given the opportunity to attend a
careers session on the basis of the stereotypical assumption that she will
want to focus on bringing up her baby, rather than make decisions about her
education and future career. This decision, resulting in unfavourable
treatment based on a stereotype, is likely to be pregnancy and maternity
discrimination.
Advertising an intention to discriminate
5.17 If a school advertises that, in offering education, benefits, facilities or
services, it will treat applicants less favourably because of a protected
characteristic, this may amount to direct discrimination. An 'advertisement'
can include a notice or circular, whether distributed to the public or not, any
publication, a radio, television or cinema spot, advertising via the internet or
an exhibition.
63
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A school's admissions policy published on its website states that it does not
wish to receive applications from the Gypsy and Traveller community. This
will discourage Traveller and Roma children from applying, and may amount
to direct race discrimination.
Unwanted conduct related to a protected characteristic
5.18 Unwanted conduct by a school towards a pupil that constitutes harassment
that is related to the protected characteristics of disability, race or sex is
made unlawful under the harassment provisions of the Act. The harassment
provisions are explained in detail in paragraphs 5.55-5.70.
5.19 Unwanted conduct by a school towards a pupil that is related to the
protected characteristics of gender reassignment, religion or belief, or
sexual orientation and which results in a pupil suffering a detriment is not
covered by the harassment provisions. However, it is unlawful under the
direct discrimination provisions of the Act if the pupil suffers a
disadvantage.
64
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
A member of school staff repeatedly tells a transsexual pupil that 'he'
should not dress like a girl and that 'he' looks silly, which causes the
pupil great distress. This would not be covered by the harassment
provisions, because it is related to gender reassignment, but could
constitute direct discrimination on the grounds of gender reassignment.
During a personal, social, health and economic education (PSHE)
lesson, a teacher describes homosexuality as 'unnatural' and states that
he will be covering only straight relationships in the lesson. A bisexual
pupil in the class is upset and offended by these comments. This may
be direct discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation.
Indirect discrimination
5.20 Indirect discrimination occurs when a school applies a provision, criterion or
practice in the same way for all pupils or a particular pupil group, such as A-
level physics students, but this has the effect of putting pupils sharing a
protected characteristic within the general student group at a particular
disadvantage. It does not matter that the school did not intend to
disadvantage the pupils with a particular protected characteristic in this
way; what does matter is whether the provision, criterion or practice does,
or would, disadvantage such pupils compared to pupils who do not share
that characteristic.
s19
5.21 'Disadvantage' is not defined in the Act. It could include denial of an
opportunity or choice, deterrence, rejection or exclusion. The courts have
found that 'detriment', a similar concept, is something about which a
reasonable person would complain - so an unjustified sense of grievance
would not amount to a disadvantage. A disadvantage does not have to be
quantifiable and the pupil does not have to experience actual loss. It is
enough that the pupil can reasonably say that he or she would have
preferred to be treated differently.
5.22 In some situations, the link between the protected characteristic and the
disadvantage might be obvious, for example a uniform policy may create a
disadvantage for pupils with particular religious beliefs.
65
Technical guidance for schools in England
5.23 In other situations, it will be less obvious how pupils sharing a protected
characteristic are, or would be, put at a disadvantage. In these cases,
statistics, or personal testimony, or evidence including, if appropriate,
evidence from an expert, may help to explain the nature of the protected
characteristic or the behaviour of the group sharing the characteristic. The
evidence might take the form, for example, of evidence about the principles
of a particular religious belief. This in turn will help to determine the nature
of any disadvantage.
Example:
A pupil has a belief that pork renders him ritually unclean for the purposes of
his religion. He takes part in a school cookery class in which pupils make jelly
containing pork gelatine. The pupil's parents claim that the school is indirectly
discriminating against him by not providing cooking ingredients that do not
contain pork gelatine. Evidence of the importance of this belief in the pupil's
religion may help the school to establish whether it amounts to a
disadvantage.
5.24 'Provision', 'criterion' or 'practice' are also not defined in the Act, but can be
interpreted widely and include:
arrangements (for example for deciding who to admit);
the way in which education, or access to any benefit, service or facility is
offered or provided;
one-off decisions; and
proposals or directions to do something in a particular way.
They may be written out formally or they may simply have developed as
the school worked out the best way of achieving its aims.
5.25 Indirect discrimination will occur if all of the following four conditions are
met.
a) A school applies (or would apply) the provision, criterion or practice
equally to all relevant pupils, including a particular pupil with a protected
characteristic.
b) The provision, criterion or practice puts, or would put, pupils sharing a
protected characteristic at a particular disadvantage compared to relevant
pupils who do not share that characteristic.
c) The provision, criteria, practice or rule puts, or would put, the particular
pupil at that disadvantage.
d) The school cannot show that the provision, criteria or practice is justified
as a 'proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim'.
s19(2)
66
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
A school requires male pupils to wear a cap as part of the school
uniform. Although this requirement is applied equally to all pupils, it has
the effect of excluding Sikh boys, whose religion requires them to wear a
turban. This would be indirect discrimination based on religion and
belief, because it is unlikely that the school would be able to justify this
action.
A school instigates a policy that no jewellery should be worn. A young
woman of the Sikh religion is asked to remove her Kara bangle in line
with this policy, although the young woman explains that she is required
by her religion to wear the bangle. This could be indirect discrimination
on the grounds of religion and belief.
The comparative approach
5.26 Once it is clear that there is a provision, criterion or practice that puts, or
would put, pupils sharing a protected characteristic at a particular
disadvantage, the next stage is to consider a comparison between pupils
with that protected characteristic and those without. The circumstances of
the two groups must be sufficiently similar for a comparison to be made and
there must be no material differences in circumstances.
s23(1)
5.27 It is important to be clear which protected characteristic is relevant. In the
case of disability, this would not be disabled pupils as a whole, but pupils
with a particular disability - for example those with an equivalent visual
impairment. For race, the comparison group could be all Africans or only
Somalis, for example, depending on the circumstances.
67
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A secondary school makes plans for a series of meetings for pupils to discuss
their career options. These meetings are planned for Friday evenings.
Booking the meetings for a Friday night is a neutral practice applied equally to
all. A Jewish pupil points out that this would prevent him from attending,
because he observes Shabbat from dusk on a Friday evening. The pool for
comparison could be all pupils in the year group involved. Assuming that it
affects a significant enough number of Jewish pupils, it is reasonable to
assume that they would be placed at a particular disadvantage, so the school
must either justify its practice, or choose a different day, or make other days
additionally available, to avoid acting unlawfully.
Making the comparison
5.28 Looking at the pool, a comparison must then be made between the impact
of the provision, criterion or practice on pupils without the relevant protected
characteristic and its impact on pupils with the protected characteristic.
5.29 The way in which the comparison is carried out will depend on the
circumstances, including the protected characteristic concerned. It may, in
some circumstances, be necessary to carry out a formal comparative
exercise using statistical evidence.
Carrying out a formal comparative exercise
5.30 A school can undertake a formal comparative exercise to decide if there is
indirect discrimination in a number of ways. One established approach
involves asking the following questions.
a) What proportion of the pool has the particular protected characteristic?
b) Within the pool, does the provision, criterion or practice affect pupils
without the protected characteristic?
c) How many of these pupils are, or would be, disadvantaged by it? How is
this expressed as a proportion (x)?
d) Within the pool, how does the provision, criterion or practice affect pupils
who share the protected characteristic?
e) How many of these pupils are, or would be, put at a disadvantage by it?
How is this expressed as a proportion (y)?
68
Technical guidance for schools in England
5.31 Using this approach, a school can then compare X with y to establish
whether the pupil group with the protected characteristic experiences a
'particular disadvantage' in comparison with others - that is, whether there
is a disproportionate impact. Whether any difference identified is significant
will depend on the context, such as the size of the pool and the numbers
behind the proportions. It is not necessary to show that the majority of those
within the pool who share the protected characteristic are placed at a
disadvantage, but there must be a statistically significant disproportionate
impact in the protected characteristic group.
The position is different where the protected characteristic is religion or belief.
When pursuing a claim of indirect religion or belief discrimination a pupil does
not need to establish that others are also put at a particular disadvantage by a
provision, criterion or practice; rather the question is whether the interference
with their right to manifest their religious beliefs is proportionate given the
legitimate aims of the school (see paragraph 5.32). This is because protection
of the right to manifest religion under the European Convention on Human
Rights does not require 'group disadvantage' to be shown. 1 Therefore, even if
only one pupil is disadvantaged by a ban on an item of clothing this may still
amount to indirect discrimination if that item is an expression of their genuinely
held religious or other belief and the school is unable to show that the ban is a
proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.
What is a 'proportionate means of achieving a legitimate
aim'?
5.32 If a school can show that the provision, criterion or practice is justifiable -
that is, that it is 'a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim' - then
it will not amount to unlawful indirect discrimination. This is often known as
the 'objective justification' test. This justification test also applies to other
areas of discrimination law, for example discrimination arising from
disability.
5.33 To be legitimate, the aim of the provision, criterion or practice must be legal
and non-discriminatory, and must represent a real objective consideration.
5.34 In the context of school education, examples of legitimate aims might
include:
1 Mba V Mayor & Burgesses of the London Borough of Merton [2013] EWCA Civ
1562, and Eweida, Chaplin, Ladele & McFarlane V the United Kingdom (2013)
application numbers 48420/10, 59842/10, 51671/10 and 36516/1.
69
Technical guidance for schools in England
ensuring that education, benefits, facilities and services are targeted at
those who most need them;
the fair exercise of powers;
ensuring the health and safety of pupils and staff, provided that risks are
clearly specified;
maintaining academic and behaviour standards; and
ensuring the wellbeing and dignity of pupils.
5.35 Even if the aim is legitimate, the means of achieving it must be
proportionate. 'Proportionate' means appropriate and necessary, but
'necessary' does not mean that the provision, criterion or practice is the
only possible way of achieving the legitimate aim.
5.36 Although the financial cost of using a less discriminatory approach cannot,
by itself, provide a justification, cost can be taken into account as part of the
school's justification if there are other good reasons for adopting the chosen
practice.
5.37 The more serious the disadvantage caused by the discriminatory provision,
criterion or practice, the more convincing the justification must be.
Example:
A school bans 'cornrow' hairstyles as part of its policies on pupil appearance.
These hairstyles are more likely to be adopted by specific racial groups;
hence a blanket ban - without the possibility of any exceptions on, for
example, racial grounds — is likely to constitute indirect racial discrimination
because it is unlikely to be objectively justified on the basis of proportionality.
5.38 In a case involving disability, if a school has not complied with its duty to
make relevant reasonable adjustments, it will be difficult for it to show that
the treatment was proportionate.
Public authorities and justification of indirect
discrimination
5.39 A significant factor in determining whether a public authority (which includes
all schools maintained by a local authority) is able to justify what may
otherwise be unlawful indirect discrimination is the extent to which the
public authority has complied with its public sector equality duty.
70
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
In the cornrows example in paragraph 5.37, the school would also need to
have had due regard to the need to eliminate racial discrimination, and to
advance equality of opportunity and good race relations. If the school has not
properly complied with its broader public sector equality duty, it is likely to be
more difficult for it to justify the criteria objectively in relation to the application
of a specific policy.
Discrimination arising from disability
5.40 Discrimination arising from disability occurs when a school treats a disabled
pupil unfavourably because of something connected with his or her
disability and cannot justify such treatment.
s15
5.41 Discrimination arising from disability is different from direct discrimination.
Direct discrimination occurs because of the protected characteristic of
disability. For discrimination arising from disability to occur, the motive for
the treatment does not matter; the question is whether the disabled pupil
has been treated unfavourably because of something arising from his or her
disability.
5.42 Discrimination arising from disability is also different from indirect
discrimination. There is no need to show that other people have been
affected alongside the individual disabled pupil or for the disabled pupil to
compare himself or herself with anyone else.
5.43 Discrimination arising from disability will occur if the following three
conditions are all met.
a) A school treats a disabled pupil unfavourably - that is, puts him or her at a
disadvantage - even if this was not the school's intention.
b) This treatment is because of something connected with the disabled
pupil's disability (which could be the result, effect or outcome of that
disability), such as an inability to walk unaided or disability-related
behaviour.
c) The treatment cannot be justified by showing that it is 'a proportionate
means of achieving a legitimate aim'. (This is explained at paragraph
5.25 in relation to indirect discrimination.)
71
Technical guidance for schools in England
Unfavourable treatment
5.44 For discrimination arising from disability to occur, a disabled pupil must
have been treated 'unfavourably'. This means that he or she must be put at
a disadvantage (see paragraph 5.21). Often, the disadvantage will be
obvious and it will be clear that the treatment has been unfavourable, for
example being excluded from the school. Being denied a choice or
excluded from an opportunity is also likely to be unfavourable treatment.
Sometimes, the unfavourable treatment may be less obvious. Even if a
school thinks that it is acting in the best interests of a disabled pupil, it may
still be treating that pupil unfavourably.
s15(1) (a)
5.45 The unfavourable treatment must be because of something that arises as a
consequence of the disability. This means that there must be a connection
between whatever led to the unfavourable treatment and the disability.
5.46 The consequences of a disability include anything that is the result, effect or
outcome of a disabled pupil's disability. The consequences will be varied
and will depend on the individual effect upon a disabled pupil of his or her
disability. Some consequences may be obvious, such as an inability to walk
unaided. Others may not be obvious, such as an inability to concentrate for
long periods of time, or the need for regular rest breaks or toilet breaks, or
the need for instructions to be repeated or presented in visual form.
5.47 As long as the unfavourable treatment is because of something arising as a
consequence of the disability, it will be unlawful unless it can be objectively
justified, or unless the school did not know, or could not reasonably have
been expected to know, that the pupil was disabled.
Example:
A pupil with learning difficulties is not allowed to have a school meal because
she has become agitated and upset whilst queuing on a number of occasions.
She is asked instead to bring in a packed lunch and to eat it separately, away
from her friends. Her behaviour in the queue is a result of her learning
difficulties. The refusal to allow the pupil to have a school meal is
unfavourable treatment that is because of something that arises as a
consequence of the pupil's disability.
5.48 Unfavourable treatment will not amount to discrimination arising from
disability if the school can show that the treatment is a 'proportionate
means of achieving a legitimate aim'. This 'objective justification' test is
explained in detail in paragraph 5.32 in relation to indirect discrimination.
72
Technical guidance for schools in England
5.49 It is for the school to justify the treatment. It must produce evidence to
support its assertion that it is justified and not rely on mere generalisations.
Example:
A school refuses to allow a pupil with a colostomy bag to take part in
swimming lessons, because it assumes that the colostomy bag presents a
health and safety risk. Because the reason for the treatment is based on
general assumptions rather than a specific risk assessment, the school is
unlikely to be able to justify the treatment.
Knowledge of disability
5.50 In addition, if a school can show that it
did not know that the disabled pupil had the disability in question, and
could not reasonably have been expected to know that the disabled pupil
had the disability,
then the unfavourable treatment would not amount to unlawful discrimination
arising from disability.
s15(2)
5.51 The required knowledge is of the facts of the pupil's disability but the
school does not also need to realise that those particular facts meet the
legal definition of disability.
If the school's agent (that is, someone who undertakes tasks on the school's
behalf) or employee knows of a pupil's disability, the school will not usually be
able to claim that it does not know of the disability.
73
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A pupil tells the school secretary that she has diabetes and that she needs to
carry biscuits to eat when her blood sugar levels fall. A teacher has no
information about her disability and refuses to allow the pupil to bring food
into the classroom. When the teacher sees the pupil eating, he disciplines
her. In this case, the school is unlikely to be able to argue that it did not know
about her condition.
5.52 A school must do all it that can reasonably be expected to do to find out
whether a pupil has a disability. What is reasonable will depend on the
circumstances. This is an objective assessment. When making enquiries
about disability, schools should consider issues of dignity and privacy, and
ensure that personal information is dealt with confidentially.
Relevance of reasonable adjustments
5.53 By acting quickly to identify and put in place reasonable adjustments for
disabled pupils, a school can often avoid discrimination arising from
disability, although there may be cases in which an adjustment is unrelated
to the unfavourable treatment in question.
5.54 If a school fails to make an appropriate reasonable adjustment, it is likely to
be very difficult for it to argue that unfavourable treatment is justified.
Reasonable adjustments are explained in detail in Chapter 6.
Harassment
5.55 There are three types of harassment that are unlawful under the Act:
Harassment related to a relevant protected characteristic
Sexual harassment
Less favourable treatment of a pupil because he or she submits to or
rejects sexual harassment or harassment related to sex
s26
5.56 The relevant protected characteristics for the schools provisions are:
Disability
Race
Sex
74
Technical guidance for schools in England
5.57 Pregnancy and maternity are not protected directly under the harassment
provisions, but unwanted behaviour (as described at paragraph 5.59) will
amount to harassment related to sex.
5.58 In addition, the harassment provisions do not explicitly apply to the
protected characteristics of gender reassignment, sexual orientation, or
religion or belief in relation to schools. However, where unwanted conduct
related to any of these protected characteristics results in a pupil suffering
disadvantage, that would constitute direct discrimination.
s212(5)
Harassment related to a protected characteristic
5.59 Harassment occurs when a school, through its staff and/or agents, engages
in unwanted behaviour that is related to a relevant protected characteristic
and which has the purpose or effect of:
violating a pupil's dignity, or
creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive
environment for the pupil.
s26(1)
5.60 The word 'unwanted' means 'unwelcome' or 'uninvited'. It is not necessary
for the pupil to say that he or she objects to the behaviour for it to be
unwanted.
5.61 In this context, 'related to' has a broad meaning and includes situations in
which the pupil who is on the receiving end of the unwanted behaviour does
not have the protected characteristic himself or herself, provided that there
is a connection between the behaviour and a protected characteristic. This
would also include situations in which the pupil is associated with someone
who has a protected characteristic, or is wrongly perceived as having a
particular protected characteristic.
Sexual harassment
5.62 Sexual harassment of a pupil is obviously a serious incident that is likely to
result in criminal proceedings and raise safeguarding issues for the school.
Such proceedings are beyond the scope of this Guidance. The Guidance
deals with the sexual harassment under the Act only, which may in practice
rarely be relevant in a school context, because other sanctions - possibly
including criminal proceedings - will come into play.
s26(2)
5.63 Sexual harassment occurs when a school, through its staff and/or agents,
engages in unwanted behaviour that is of a sexual nature and which has
the purpose or effect of:
75
Technical guidance for schools in England
violating a pupil's dignity, or
creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive
environment for the pupil.
5.64 'Of a sexual nature' can include verbal, non-verbal or physical conduct,
including unwelcome sexual advances, inappropriate touching, forms of
sexual assault, sexual jokes, displaying pornographic photographs or
drawings, or sending emails with material of a sexual nature.
Example:
A sixth-form female pupil is asked intimate questions about her personal life
and subjected to sexual innuendos by her teacher. This would constitute
sexual harassment.
Less favourable treatment of a pupil because he or she
submits to or rejects sexual harassment or harassment
related to sex
5.65 It is unlawful to treat a pupil less favourably because he or she either
submits to, or rejects, sexual harassment or harassment related to his or
her sex.
s26(3)
Example:
A student teacher on a placement asks a sixth-form pupil out and flirts openly
with him in class, but the pupil rejects her advances and assumes that is the
end of it. The student teacher then marks the pupil's work very harshly. This
could amount to less favourable treatment for rejecting unwanted conduct and
therefore to sexual harassment.
5.66 For all three types of harassment, if the purpose of subjecting the pupil to
the unwanted conduct is to create any of the circumstances set out at
paragraph 5.59, this will be sufficient to establish unlawful harassment. It
will not be necessary to inquire into the effect of the conduct on that pupil.
5.67 Regardless of the intended purpose, unwanted conduct will also amount to
harassment if it has the effect of creating any of the circumstances set out.
76
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
Care staff in a residential special school deliberately make racist
remarks on a regular basis in the presence of a pupil of Indian heritage.
Their purpose is to create an intimidating environment for him. In these
circumstances, it is unnecessary to inquire into the effect of their
conduct upon him, because the purpose of their behaviour is to create
an intimidating environment.
A teacher regularly makes comments in class that the female Pakistani
pupils do not really need to worry about doing well in their GCSEs,
because they will all be 'married off' soon. It is not the teacher's purpose
to offend or humiliate any of the pupils in this classroom, but this may
still amount to racial harassment where it is determined that the effect of
the comments and language creates a humiliating or offensive
environment for any of the pupils present.
5.68 In deciding whether conduct had that effect, each of the following must be
taken into account.
a) The perception of the pupil: Did he or she regard it as violating his or
her dignity, or creating an intimidating (etc) environment for him or her?
This part of the test is a subjective question and depends on how the pupil
regards the treatment.
b) The other circumstances of the case: Circumstances that may be
relevant and therefore need to be taken into account can include:
the personal circumstances of the pupil experiencing the conduct, for
example his or her health, including mental health, mental capacity,
cultural norms or previous experience of harassment; or
the relationship between the person carrying out the harassment and
the pupils experiencing the conduct.
c) Whether it is reasonable for the conduct to have that effect: This is an
objective test.
5.69 Courts or tribunals are unlikely to find that the unwanted conduct has the
effect of, for example, offending a pupil if the court or tribunal considers the
pupil to be hypersensitive and that another pupil subjected to the same
conduct would not have been offended.
77
Technical guidance for schools in England
5.70 Where the school is a public authority (as all publicly funded schools are), it
may also be relevant in cases of alleged harassment whether the alleged
perpetrator was exercising any of her or his Convention rights protected
under the Human Rights Act 1998. For example, the right to freedom of
thought, conscience, and religion or freedom of speech of the alleged
harasser will need to be taken into account when considering all relevant
circumstances of the case.
Victimisation
5.71 The Act protects people from being subjected to a detriment (which is, in
effect, the same as a disadvantage) because they have carried out what is
called a 'protected act', or because the school believes that a person has
carried out or is going to carry out a protected act.
ss27, 27(1)
5.72 There are additional victimisation provisions for schools that extend the
protection to pupils who are victimised because their parent or sibling has
carried out a protected act.
s86(2)
5.73 A 'protected act' is:
Making a claim or complaint of discrimination (under the Act)
Giving evidence or information in a claim under the Act
Making an allegation that the school or someone else has breached the
Act
Doing anything else in connection with the Act
s27(2)
5.74 If a school subjects someone to a detriment because he or she has carried
out such an act, then this will be unlawful victimisation. There must be a link
between what the pupil (or parent or sibling) did and the school's treatment
of him or her.
5.75 The treatment does not need to be linked to a protected characteristic.
78
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A teacher gives a pupil a detention because he thinks that she intends to
support another pupil's sexual harassment claim. This would amount to
victimisation.
Who is not protected?
5.76 A pupil who, in bad faith, gives false information or evidence (that is,
information or evidence that he or she knew was false), or makes an
allegation that was false and given in bad faith, would not be protected
against victimisation. The original complaint or claim would not be affected,
provided that it was not made in bad faith.
s27(3)
Example:
A pupil with a grudge against his teacher knowingly gives false evidence in
another pupil's discrimination claim against the school. He is subsequently
excluded from the school for supporting the claim. This treatment could not
amount to victimisation because his evidence was untrue and given in bad
faith.
Victimisation for actions of parents or siblings
5.77 A school must not subject a pupil to a detriment because of something that
his or her parent or sibling has done in relation to the making of a complaint
of discrimination.
s86(2)
79
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
The stepbrother of a pupil, who is a wheelchair user, has made a complaint to
his school governing body about the school not fulfilling its duty to improve
the physical environment of the school for physically disabled pupils. As a
result of this, the non-disabled stepsister of the pupil is not admitted into the
school. This would amount to unlawful victimisation.
5.78 These victimisation provisions apply to a child in relation to whom the
parent was (or parents were) making a complaint and also to any other
children who are pupils at the school. This also applies if a parent supports
a teacher's complaint against the school under Part 5 (the employment
provisions) of the Act.
5.79 If the information or evidence was false and given in bad faith (that is, of the
parent or sibling knew it to be false), or the allegation was false and given in
bad faith, then this protection for the pupil will still apply, provided that the
pupil did not act in bad faith.
Example:
A pupil makes a complaint against his school, claiming that he has suffered
discrimination by a member of staff because of his sexual orientation. The
pupil's younger brother, at the same school, is protected against any
detrimental treatment by the school because of this complaint, even if it is
later found out that the older brother was not acting in good faith.
5.80 There must be a link between what the parent(s) or the pupil has done and
the school's detrimental treatment of the pupil or sibling.
5.81 The pupil or sibling who is being treated badly does not need to have any of
the protected characteristics.
5.82 The fact that a complaint or claim is not upheld does not mean that it was
made in bad faith.
80
Technical guidance for schools in England
Obligations to former pupils
5.83 Even after a person has left a school, the school must not discriminate
against him or her, harass or victimise him or her. This applies only if the
discrimination, harassment or victimisation arises out of, and is closely
connected with, his or her previous relationship with the school and would
have been unlawful if he or she were still a pupil.
s108
Example:
An ex-pupil asks for a reference from the school. It would be unlawful for the
reference to be unflattering because of a protected characteristic of the ex-
pupil, or because he or she at one time brought or supported a discrimination
complaint against the school.
5.84 This obligation to former pupils would include the duty to make reasonable
adjustments for disabled former pupils if they were to continue to be at a
substantial disadvantage in comparison to former pupils without a disability.
This obligation applies only if the substantial disadvantage arises out of and
is closely connected with the person's having been a pupil.
Example:
A school librarian sends an annual newsletter to former pupils. One former
pupil who has a visual impairment requests that it is sent to him by email
rather than in hard copy. The librarian does not provide him with an electronic
copy. This is likely to be a failure to make a reasonable adjustment.
Liability for employees, agents and others
5.85 As an employer, a school is legally responsible for acts of discrimination,
harassment and victimisation carried out by its employees in the course of
employment or by people who take action on its behalf (agents).
s109
5.86 It does not matter whether the school knew about or approved of those
acts.
81
Technical guidance for schools in England
5.87 However, if a school can show that it took all reasonable steps to prevent
its employees or agents from acting unlawfully, it will not be held legally
responsible.
5.88 It is important that schools take steps to make sure that their employees
and agents understand that they must not discriminate against pupils, or
harass them or victimise them, and that they understand their duties in
relation to making reasonable adjustments for disabled pupils.
Usually a school will not be responsible for discrimination, harassment or
victimisation by someone other than their employee or agent. However, case
law indicates that it is possible that they could be found to be legally
responsible for failing to take action where they have some degree of control
over a situation where there is a continuing course of offensive conduct, but
they do not take action to prevent its recurrence even though they are aware of
it happening >. For example, if a pupil reports that they have been harassed at
a work placement provider the school could be responsible if it takes no action
to address the problem. Taking reasonable steps to protect pupils against
discrimination, harassment or victimisation in such circumstances is likely to
ensure that a school will not be held legally responsible if it does happen.
Personal liability of employees and agents
5.89 An employee (of a school) is personally responsible for his or her own acts
of discrimination, harassment or victimisation carried out during his or her
period of employment, whether or not the employer is also liable. However,
an employee is not personally liable in relation to disability discrimination in
schools.
s110
82
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A teaching assistant racially discriminated against a pupil. The school was
able to show that it took all reasonable steps to prevent the discrimination and
therefore was not liable. The pupil can still make a claim of discrimination
against the teaching assistant. However, if this were a case of discrimination
because of disability, the pupil would not be able to make a claim against the
teaching assistant, because the personal liability provisions do not cover
disability discrimination in schools.
5.90 If the relationship is one of a person (the 'principal') paying for someone
else to take action on his or her behalf and someone taking action for him
or her (his or her 'agent'), rather than that of employer and employee, the
agent is personally responsible in the same circumstances.
5.91 Employees or agents will still be responsible for their acts of discrimination,
harassment or victimisation even if they did not know that their actions were
against the law.
5.92 But there is an exception to this: an employee or agent will not be
responsible if his or her employer or principal has told him or her that there
is nothing wrong with what he or she is doing and he or she reasonably
believes this to be true.
5.93 It is a criminal offence, punishable by a fine (at time of writing) of up to
£5,000, for an employer or principal to make a false statement in order to
try to get an employee or agent to carry out an unlawful act.
s110(4)
Instructing and causing discrimination
5.94 A school must not instruct, cause or induce someone to discriminate
against, harass or victimise another person, or to attempt to do so.
s111
5.95 Both the person who receives the instruction and the intended victim will
have a claim against whoever gave the instructions. This applies whether or
not the instruction is carried out, provided that the recipient or intended
victim suffers loss or harm as a result.
5.96 It applies only where the person giving the instruction is in a legal
relationship with the person receiving the instruction, such between as
employer and employee, or agent and principal.
83
Technical guidance for schools in England
5.97 Employment tribunals will deal with complaints from an employee or agent
who has received the instructions and the victim can make a claim in the
same way as he or she would for any other claim under the Act. So, if a
member of staff is instructed to discriminate against a pupil because of his
or her sex, for example, then the member of staff can make a claim to an
employment tribunal and the pupil can make a claim to a county court.
5.98 The Equality and Human Rights Commission can also take action for
unlawful instructions to discriminate.
Aiding contraventions
5.99 It is unlawful for a school to help someone else to commit an act that it
knows is unlawful under the Act.
s112
5.100 However, if the person giving assistance has been told by the person
whom he or she assists that the act is lawful and he or she reasonably
believes this to be true, he or she will not be legally responsible.
5.101 It is a criminal offence, punishable by a fine (at time of writing) of up to
£5,000, to make a false statement in order to get another person's help to
commit an unlawful act under the Act.
Protected characteristics
5.102 The protected characteristics for the schools provisions are:
Disability
Gender reassignment
Pregnancy and maternity
Race
Religion or belief
Sex
Sexual orientation
5.103 Age, and marriage and civil partnership are not protected characteristics
for the schools provisions.
84
Technical guidance for schools in England
Disability
5.104 A person is a disabled person (that is, someone who has the protected
characteristic of disability) if he or she has, or has had, a physical and/or
mental impairment that has what the law calls 'a substantial and long-term
adverse effect on [his or her] ability to carry out normal day-to-day
activities'.
s6
5.105 There is no need for a person to have a medically diagnosed cause for his
or her impairment; what matters is the effect of the impairment, not the
cause.
5.106 In relation to physical impairment, the following are covered by the Act.
Conditions that affect the body, such as arthritis, hearing or sight
impairment (unless this is correctable by glasses or contact lenses),
diabetes, asthma, epilepsy, conditions such as HIV infection, cancer and
multiple sclerosis, as well as loss of limbs or the use of limbs, are covered.
HIV infection, cancer and multiple sclerosis are covered as soon as
someone has them.
Sch 1, para 6
Severe disfigurement (such as scarring) is covered even if it has no
physical impact on the person with the disfigurement, provided that the
long-term requirement is met (see paragraph 5.108).
Sch 1, para 3
People who are registered as blind or partially sighted, or who are certified
as being blind or partially sighted by a consultant ophthalmologist, are
automatically treated as disabled under the Act.
5.107 Mental impairment includes conditions such as dyslexia and autism, as
well as learning disabilities such as Down's syndrome, and mental health
conditions such as depression and schizophrenia.
5.108 The other tests to apply to decide whether someone has the protected
characteristic of disability are as follows.
The length of time for which the effect of the condition has lasted or will
continue must be 'long term', which means that an impairment is likely to
last for the rest of the person's life, or has lasted at least 12 months, or the
total period for which it lasts is likely to be at least 12 months. If the person
no longer has the condition, but it is likely to recur, or if the person no
longer has the condition, he or she will be considered to be a disabled
person.
Sch 1, para 2
85
Technical guidance for schools in England
The activities upon which the impairment has a substantial adverse effect
must be 'normal day-to-day activities'. Just because the activity is mainly
undertaken at work (e.g. typing) does not mean that it is not a normal day-
to-day activity.
'Substantial' means more than minor or trivial.
s212(1)
The condition must have this impact without taking into account the effect
of any medication that the person is taking, or any aids or assistance or
adaptations that he or she uses, like a wheelchair, walking stick,
assistance dog or special computer software. The exception to this is the
wearing of glasses or contact lenses, for which it is the effect while the
person is wearing the glasses or contact lenses that is taken into account.
Sch 1, para 5
Example:
Someone who has attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) might be
considered to have a disability even if his or her medication controls the
condition so well that he or she rarely experiences any symptoms, if without
the medication the ADHD would have long-term adverse effects.
5.109 There are special rules concerning impairments that are progressive or
which have fluctuating or recurrent effects.
5.110 Further detailed guidance on the definition of disability is available online.
5.111 The Act's definition of disability is not the same as the definition of special
educational needs in section 20 of the Children and Families Act 2014. The
Children and Families Act 2014 states that, 'a child or young person has
special educational needs if he or she has a learning difficulty or disability
which calls for special educational provision to be made for him or her'. In
relation to school-age children, the learning difficulty could mean that they
have much greater difficulty in learning than the majority of their peers,
and/or that a disability stops or hinders them from using the educational
facilities typically available in schools in the area. There will be some pupils
who are covered by the Equality Act 2010's definition of disability, but not
the Children and Families Act 2014's definition of special educational
needs, and vice versa, although a significant number of pupils are covered
by both.
86
Technical guidance for schools in England
5.112 Certain conditions are not to be regarded as impairments for the purposes
of the Act². These are:
tendency to set fires;
tendency to steal;
tendency to physical or sexual abuse of other persons;
exhibitionism;
voyeurism;
hayfever, except where it aggravates the effect of another condition.
However, it should be noted that a tribunal decision in 2018 means that
children in schools who have a tendency to physical abuse of others as a
result of their impairment are not excluded from the protection of the
Equality Act. 3
Gender reassignment
5.113 Gender reassignment means proposing to undergo, undergoing or having
undergone a process to reassign a person's sex.
5.114 To be protected from gender reassignment discrimination, a person does
not need to have undergone any medical treatment or surgery to change
from their birth sex to their preferred gender.
5.115 A person can be at any stage in the transition process, from proposing to
reassign sex, undergoing a process of reassignment, or having completed
it. It does not matter whether or not a person has applied for or obtained a
Gender Recognition Certificate, which is the legal document that enables
trans people aged 18 and over to have their acquired gender recognised as
their legal sex.
5.116 A child can have the protected characteristic of gender reassignment.
s7
2 The Equality Act 2010 (Disability) Regulations 2010 (S.I. 2010/2128).
3 C&C V The Governing Body of a School [2018] UKUT 269 (AAC).
87
Technical guidance for schools in England
Pregnancy and maternity
5.117 The Act lists pregnancy and maternity as a protected characteristic.
Pregnancy and maternity discrimination is covered in paragraphs 5.13-
5.16.
s4
Race
5.118 Race means a person's
colour, and/or
nationality (including citizenship), and/or
ethnic or national origin,
and a racial group is composed of people who have or share a colour,
nationality or ethic or national origins.
s9
5.119 A person has the protected characteristic of race if he or she belongs to
a particular racial group, such as 'British people'.
5.120 Racial groups can comprise two or more distinct racial groups, such as
'British Asians'.
Religion or belief
5.121 The protected characteristic of religion or belief includes any religion and
any religious or philosophical belief. It also includes a lack of any such
religion or belief.
s10
5.122 A religion need not be mainstream or well known to gain protection as a
religion. It must, though, be identifiable, and have a clear structure and
belief system. Denominations or sects within religions may be considered
a religion. New religious movements may also be considered religions or
beliefs.
88
Technical guidance for schools in England
5.123 'Religious belief' goes beyond beliefs about and adherence to a religion
or its central articles of faith, and may vary from person to person within
the same religion. A person does not have to prove that the
manifestation of their religion or belief is a core component of the religion
or philosophical belief they follow, but it may instead be a means by
which they choose to express their adherence to their religious belief. 4
5.124 A belief that is not a religious belief may be a philosophical belief, such
as humanism or atheism.
5.125 A belief need not include faith or worship of a god or gods, but must
affect how a person lives his or her life or perceives the world.
5.126 For a belief to be protected by the Act, it must have the following
features.
It must be genuinely held.
It must be a belief, and not an opinion or viewpoint based on information
available at the moment.
It must be a belief as to a weighty and substantial aspect of human life and
behaviour.
It must attain a certain level of cogency, seriousness, cohesion and
importance.
It must be worthy of respect in a democratic society.
It must be compatible with human dignity and not conflict with the
fundamental rights of others.
Sex
5.127 A person's sex refers to the fact that he or she is a male or female of
any age.
5.128 'Sex' is understood as binary - being male or female - with a person's
legal sex being determined by what is recorded on their birth certificate,
based on biological sex. A trans person aged 18 or over can change their
legal sex by obtaining a Gender Recognition Certificate through
procedures set out in the Gender Recognition Act 2004.
s11
4 Mba V Mayor & Burgesses of the London Borough of Merton [2013] EWCA Civ
1562 and Eweida, Chaplin, Ladele & McFarlane V the United Kingdom (2013)
application numbers 48420/10, 59842/10, 51671/10 and 36516/1.
89
Technical guidance for schools in England
Sexual orientation
5.129 Sexual orientation means the attraction that a person feels towards one
sex or another (or both), which determines with whom he or she forms
intimate relationships or to whom he or she is attracted.
Some people are attracted only to those of the same sex (lesbian women
and gay men).
Some people are attracted to people of both sexes (bisexual people).
Some people are attracted only to the opposite sex (straight people).
s12
5.130 Everyone is protected from being treated worse or differently because of
sexual orientation, whether they are bisexual, gay, lesbian or straight.
5.131 Sexual orientation discrimination also covers discrimination connected
with manifestations of that sexual orientation, such as someone's
appearance, the places that he or she visits or the people with whom he
or she associates.
Frequently asked questions (FAQs)
5.132 Does the Equality Act prohibition on religious discrimination in
schools mean that we cannot have a school uniform policy that is
consistent, and so forbids the wearing of items such as burkas?
Not necessarily. The application of any school uniform policy could amount to
indirect discrimination unless the policy can be justified as being a
proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim. It is important with any
school uniform policy to try to reach a consensus with parents about its
adoption, but in particular to be able to justify any adverse impact that it will
have on pupils with a variety of protected characteristics, whether religion,
disability, sex, gender reassignment, etc.
5.133 Surely the harassment provisions mean that any sensitive pupil
will be able to bring a claim if a teacher says something to him or
her that he or she does not like?
Not true. Unless the purpose of the conduct that is the subject of a harassment
claim was to create an intimidating environment (which is not usually the case),
then one of the things at which the court or tribunal will be looking is whether it
is reasonable for the pupil to be affected by the behaviour in the way in which
he or she says that he or she has. This means that if he or she is being
oversensitive, it is unlikely that he or she will be found to have been subjected
to harassment.
5.134 Is a pupil who wants to cross-dress protected under the Act?
90
Technical guidance for schools in England
If that pupil is cross-dressing as part of the process of reassigning his or her
sex, then he or she will be protected from any discrimination. If he or she
simply likes dressing as a member of the opposite sex, then he or she will not.
5.135 If a teacher believes that he or she is acting in the best interests of
a pupil, can he or she nevertheless be held to have discriminated?
Discrimination does not require there have to been any specific intention on
the part of the discriminator: as long as the treatment is (in the case of direct
discrimination) because of the protected characteristic, then it will be
discrimination, regardless of intention. This is why it is important for there to be
training on equality and on the provisions of the Act for all those with pupil
contact.
5.136 A pupil with a large facial birthmark does not consider herself to be
disfigured or disabled. Is she still protected by the Act?
Yes: her birthmark is identified as a disfigurement, which is specified in the Act
as a disability, and therefore she is protected by the disability discrimination
provisions of the Act.
91
Technical guidance for schools in England
Chapter 6 | Reasonable
adjustments for disabled pupils
6.1 Schools and education authorities have had a duty to provide reasonable
adjustments for disabled pupils since 2002: originally, under the Disability
Discrimination Act 1995 (the DDA 1995); and, from October 2010, under
the Equality Act 2010. From 1 September 2012, the reasonable
adjustments duty for schools and education authorities includes a duty to
provide auxiliary aids and services for disabled pupils. The decision to bring
this duty into force was taken by the Department for Education after a
public consultation, with a positive response to its introduction without
additional regulation from the majority of respondents.
6.2 The duty to provide auxiliary aids is not a new one, and already applies in
other contexts such as employment, service provision, and further and
higher education. This chapter explains how the requirement to include
auxiliary aids and services within the reasonable adjustments duty works in
schools and education authorities.
What is the reasonable adjustments duty?
6.3 The duty is 'to take such steps as it is reasonable to have to take to avoid
the substantial disadvantage' to a disabled person caused by a provision,
criterion or practice applied by or on behalf of a school, or by the absence
of an auxiliary aid or service.
s20; Sch 13, para 2
6.4 In the Act as a whole, there are three elements to the reasonable
adjustments duty that relate to:
Provisions, criteria and practices
Auxiliary aids and services
Physical features
6.5 The physical features element does not apply to schools in relation to
disabled pupils; instead, they have a duty to plan better access for disabled
pupils generally, including in relation to the physical environment of the
school.
Sch 13, para 2
92
Technical guidance for schools in England
6.6 The duty to make reasonable adjustments in relation to provisions, criteria
and practices is not a new duty for schools and is the same as the duty
under the DDA 1995. The new element of the duty for schools is the
provision of auxiliary aids and services for disabled pupils.
6.7 Many of the reasonable adjustments that schools are already making for
disabled pupils undoubtedly include the use of some auxiliary aids, such as
coloured overlays for dyslexic pupils, pen grips, adapted PE equipment,
adapted keyboards and computer software.
6.8 The duty to make reasonable adjustments requires a school to take positive
steps to ensure that disabled pupils can fully participate in the education
provided by the school, and that they can enjoy the other benefits, facilities
and services that the school provides for pupils.
6.9 Many reasonable adjustments are inexpensive and will often involve a
change in practice rather than the provision of expensive pieces of
equipment or additional staff.
6.10 A school's duty to make reasonable adjustments is an anticipatory one
owed to disabled pupils generally, and therefore schools need to think in
advance about what disabled pupils might require and what adjustments
might need to be made for them.
To whom does the duty apply?
6.11 The reasonable adjustments duty is owed to disabled pupils, as defined in
the Act.
6.12 The Act says that a pupil has a disability if he or she has a physical or
mental impairment that has a long-term and substantial adverse effect on
his or her ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities. Physical or mental
impairment includes sensory impairments such as those affecting sight or
hearing.
The definition of disability is explained in more detail in Chapter 5 and more
guidance on the definition of disability is available online at
93
Technical guidance for schools in England
6.13 Some disabled pupils will also have special educational needs (SEN) and
may be receiving support via school-based SEN provision or have a
statement of SEN or an education, health and care plan (EHC plan). The
fact that a disabled pupil has SEN or has an SEN statement or EHC plan
does not take away a school's duty to make reasonable adjustments for
that pupil. In practice, of course, many disabled pupils who also have an
SEN statement or EHC plan will receive all of the support they need
through the SEN framework and there will be nothing extra that the school
has to do. However, some disabled pupils will not have SEN and some
disabled pupils with SEN will still need reasonable adjustments to be made
for them, in addition to any support that they receive through the SEN
framework.
What is meant by 'substantial disadvantage'?
6.14 The reasonable adjustments duty is triggered only where there is a need to
avoid 'substantial disadvantage'. 'Substantial' is defined as being anything
more than minor or trivial. Whether a disabled pupil is at a substantial
disadvantage or not will depend on the individual situation.
s212(1)
Example:
A disabled pupil with severe manual dexterity difficulties finds it difficult to
write large amounts of text by hand and so this takes him considerably longer
than other pupils. In a lesson in which large amounts of text are being copied
from the board, he would be at a substantial disadvantage. However, in a
lesson in which there is no handwriting required, he would not be at a
substantial disadvantage in relation to his difficulties with handwriting.
6.15 The pupil must be at a substantial disadvantage in comparison with non-
disabled pupils. In most cases, this will be obvious.
94
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A visually impaired pupil who can see material only in 16pt font or larger will
be at a substantial disadvantage compared to non-disabled pupils if materials
are provided in smaller print.
6.16 In other cases, it will not be so obvious, but it will be no less a substantial
disadvantage.
Example:
A pupil with chronic fatigue syndrome finds it harder to concentrate in lessons
in the afternoon as a result of an increase in her tiredness.
What does the duty cover?
6.17 The phrases 'provision, criterion and practice' and 'auxiliary aids and
services' are not defined in the Act. The duty in relation to provisions,
criteria and practices covers the way in which a school operates on a daily
basis, including its decisions and actions.
Example:
A school uniform policy would fall within this element of the reasonable
adjustments duty and a school may be required to make adjustments to this
policy for disabled pupils with an allergy to synthetic materials who need to
wear cotton clothing.
6.18 The duty in relation to the provision of auxiliary aids and services generally
means anything that constitutes additional support or assistance for a
disabled pupil, such as a piece of equipment or support from a member of
staff.
95
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
Providing a pupil who is a wheelchair user with a support assistant to push
him or her around school would be an auxiliary service. Providing a step so
that a pupil with restricted growth syndrome can reach the desks in the
science lab would be an example of providing an auxiliary aid.
What is meant by 'reasonable' steps
6.19 The duty to make reasonable adjustments requires schools to take what
are referred to in the Act as 'reasonable steps' to make adjustments.
6.20 The Act does not say what is 'reasonable'. This allows flexibility for different
sets of circumstances so that, for example, what is reasonable in one set of
circumstances may not be reasonable in another.
6.21 The crux of the reasonable adjustments duty is not whether something is an
auxiliary aid or whether it is an adjustment to a practice, but whether it is
something that is reasonable for the school to have to do. It is not possible
for a school to justify a failure to make a reasonable adjustment; the
question is only whether or not the adjustment is reasonable.
6.22 While it is not possible to say what will or will not be reasonable in any
particular situation, some of the factors that are likely to be taken into
account in deciding what it is or is not reasonable for a school or a local
education authority to have to do are set out in paragraph 6.26. These
factors are based on those that tribunals and courts have already taken into
account when considering reasonable adjustments under the equivalent
provisions in the DDA 1995.
6.23 The purpose of taking the steps is to ensure that disabled pupils are not
placed at a substantial disadvantage compared to non-disabled pupils. The
duty to make reasonable adjustments equates to ensuring that steps are
taken to provide the best possible education for disabled pupils.
6.24 If, having considered the issue thoroughly, there are genuinely no steps
that it would be reasonable for a school to take to make its education,
benefits, facilities or services more accessible, the school is unlikely to be in
breach of the law if it makes no changes. It is unlikely, though, that there
will be nothing that a school will be able to do for a pupil in such a situation.
6.25 Where a school or local authority decides that there are no reasonable
steps that it can take, it is important that it sets out its reasons for this
decision so that, if it is challenged by the child's parents, it can explain to
them and, if necessary, a tribunal why it has acted in the way that it has.
96
Technical guidance for schools in England
Factors to be taken into account
6.26 Without intending to be exhaustive, the following are some of the factors
that are likely to be taken into account when considering what adjustments
it is reasonable for a school to have to make:
The extent to which special educational provision will be provided to the
disabled pupil under Part 3 of the Children and Families Act 2014.
The resources of the school and the availability of financial or other
assistance
The financial and other costs of making the adjustment
The extent to which taking any particular step would be effective in
overcoming the substantial disadvantage suffered by a disabled pupil
The practicability of the adjustment
The effect of the disability on the individual
Health and safety requirements
The need to maintain academic, musical, sporting and other standards
The interests of other pupils and prospective pupils
The extent to which special educational provision will
be provided to the disabled pupil under Part 3 of the
Children and Families Act 2014.
6.27 There is a significant overlap between those pupils who are disabled and
those who have SEN.
6.28 Many disabled pupils may receive support in school through the SEN
framework. In some cases, the substantial disadvantage that they
experience may be overcome by support received under the SEN
framework and so there will be no obligation under the Act for the school or
local authority to make reasonable adjustments.
Example:
A disabled pupil has an EHC plan and attends a maintained mainstream
secondary school. Through her EHC plan, she receives two hours a week of
specialist teaching and uses an electronic notetaker in lessons. Because the
support that she requires is provided through her EHC plan, the school does
not therefore have to make reasonable adjustments by providing these
auxiliary aids and services for her.
6.29 In other cases, a disabled pupil may need reasonable adjustments to be
made in addition to the special educational provision that he or she is
receiving.
97
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
An infant school disabled pupil with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) receives some individual teaching assistant support through the SEN
framework. He is also a wheelchair user and requires level access to
classrooms. Although it is not a special educational need, a failure to provide
a reasonable adjustment will place him at a substantial disadvantage. The
school ensures that all of his classrooms are wheelchair accessible. This
would be a reasonable adjustment for the school to make.
6.30 Some disabled pupils are not classified as having SEN, but if they are
disabled and are suffering a substantial disadvantage, they may still need
reasonable adjustments to be made.
6.31 There will be some instances in which a disabled pupil is provided with
support from another agency. In these cases, it would not be reasonable to
expect the school to duplicate this support.
The resources of the school and the availability of
financial or other assistance
6.32 It is more likely to be reasonable for a school with substantial financial
resources to make an adjustment with a significant cost than for a school
with fewer resources. The resources available to the school as a whole in
practice - such as its staffing levels - should be taken into account, as well
as other calls on those resources. The reasonableness of an adjustment
will depend not only on the resources available in practice for the
adjustment, but also on all other relevant factors (such as effectiveness and
practicability). It may also be relevant to consider what other similar schools
spend on adjustments.
98
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A disabled pupil with cerebral palsy uses a manual wheelchair occasionally,
but not every day. The wheelchair that he normally uses is being repaired and
so he is having difficulties moving around the school. The school has a
wheelchair that it allows him to use in school until his is repaired. This is a
reasonable adjustment for the school to make because the school already
has this resource available to it. However, if the school did not have a
wheelchair, it would not be expected to purchase one for the pupil as a
reasonable adjustment.
6.33 If a disabled pupil has a particular piece of special or adapted equipment
that he or she is prepared to use while at school, it may be reasonable for
the school to allow the use of the equipment.
The financial and other costs of making the adjustment
6.34 If an adjustment costs little or nothing to implement, it is likely to be
reasonable to do so unless some other factor (such as practicability or
effectiveness) makes it unreasonable. The costs to be taken into account
include those of staff and other resources. The significance of the cost of a
step may depend in part on what the school might otherwise spend in the
circumstances and also on what other schools, in similar situations, might
spend.
6.35 In assessing the likely costs of making an adjustment, the availability of
external funding should be taken into account. The latter is most likely to be
significant when funding is available through the SEN framework.
The effectiveness of the step in avoiding the
disadvantage
6.36 Schools need to think carefully about what adjustments can be made to
avoid the disadvantage experienced by the individual disabled pupil. Even
pupils with the same disability might need different adjustments to
overcome the disadvantage. It is important not to make assumptions about
a disabled pupil's needs, because this may lead a school to provide a
completely ineffective adjustment.
99
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A school admits a disabled pupil who is deaf and decides, without consulting
the pupil, to install an induction loop in all teaching rooms - but the pupil does
not use a hearing aid and so is unable to benefit from the induction loop. The
pupil reads lips and so a reasonable adjustment would have been to tell all
staff to ensure that they face the pupil when speaking to him.
6.37 It is unlikely to be reasonable for a school to have to make an adjustment
involving little benefit in reducing the disadvantage experienced by the
disabled pupil, even if the pupil requests this. If this is the only possibility,
however, of avoiding the disadvantage and there is a prospect of it having
some positive effect, then it may be reasonable for the school to have to
take the step.
6.38 Where, however, there are other reasonable steps that a school could take,
it is unlikely that a school will discharge its reasonable adjustments duty if
the adjustment made provides little benefit to the pupil.
6.39 However, if an adjustment, when taken alone, is of marginal benefit but
may be one of several adjustments that, if grouped together, would be
effective in overcoming the disadvantage, in that case, it would be
reasonable for the school to make the adjustment.
Example:
A disabled pupil with chronic fatigue syndrome finds moving around a large
three-floor secondary school very tiring and, despite the school adjusting the
timetable and location of classes to minimise the amount that she has to
move around the school, she is still too exhausted to complete the school
day. The school then makes further adjustments, giving her a 'buddy' to carry
her books for her, using a dictaphone to record those lessons that she misses
and establishing a policy that she will not be penalised for arriving at lessons
late. These adjustments enable her to attend more lessons and to be less
disadvantaged when she does miss lessons.
6.40 It will usually be a matter of discussing with the pupil, and those who know
him or her, what those needs are and what is likely to be most effective.
100
Technical guidance for schools in England
The practicability of the adjustment
6.41 It is more likely to be reasonable for a school to have to make an
adjustment that is easy than one that is difficult, although in some
circumstances it may be reasonable to have to make an adjustment, even if
it is difficult.
Examples:
A visually impaired child requires printed handouts to be prepared in 16
pt font or larger. This can easily be accommodated by ensuring that
fonts are reset to this size prior to any documentation being printed.
-
A pupil who is a wheelchair user is therefore unable to access classes
on the first floor. A reasonable adjustment would be for the school to
rearrange the timetabling and location of classes so that all of her
classes are on the ground floor. Although this may be difficult, it does
not mean it is not a reasonable adjustment for the school to make. If
specialist facilities such as science labs are available only on the first
floor, then it may not be possible to move classes that require the use of
the specialist equipment to a different classroom; in this case, the school
will need to consider what other adjustments it could make to enable the
disabled pupil to access learning opportunities equivalent to those of her
peers.
The effect of the disability on the individual
6.42 The effect of a disability on a particular pupil will affect the adjustments that
it is reasonable for a school to make.
101
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
-
A disabled pupil with dyslexia finds it very difficult to read text typed on
white paper. The school provides handouts on yellow paper for her. This
would be a reasonable adjustment for this pupil.
Another disabled pupil with dyslexia finds it difficult to read text on any
colour of paper without a plastic overlay sheet. The school provides the
pupil with a plastic overlay sheet to use in all lessons. This would be a
reasonable adjustment for this pupil.
Health and safety requirements
6.43 The Act does not override health and safety legislation. If making a
particular adjustment would increase the risks to the health and safety of
any person (including the disabled pupil in question), then this is a relevant
factor in deciding whether it is reasonable to make that adjustment.
6.44 However, as with the approach to any question of health and safety, and
risk assessment, schools are not required to eliminate all risk. Suitable and
sufficient risk assessments should be used to help the school to determine
where risks are likely to arise and what action can be taken to minimise
those risks. Risk assessments should be specific to the individual pupil and
the activities in question. Proportionate risk management relevant to the
disability should be an ongoing process throughout a disabled pupil's time
at the school.
6.45 There might be instances in which, although an adjustment could be made,
it would not be reasonable to do so because it would endanger the health
and safety either of the disabled pupil or of other people. There might be
other instances in which schools could make anticipatory reasonable
adjustments in line with health and safety legislation, ensuring compliance
with, and not infringing, that legislation.
6.46 Health and safety issues must not be used inappropriately to avoid making
a reasonable adjustment. Schools should avoid making uninformed
assumptions about health and safety risks.
102
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
A disabled pupil with a stair-climbing wheelchair applies to a large
secondary school with several flights of stairs. The school prevents him
from using the stair-climbing wheelchair in the school because it thinks
that it will be dangerous. However, after carrying out a risk assessment
and finding out more about the wheelchair, the school realises that it
does not present a significant health and safety risk, and therefore that it
would be reasonable for the school to allow him to use it.
The need to maintain academic, musical, sporting and
other standards
6.47 The reasonable adjustments duty does not prevent a school from choosing
its best footballers, singers or mathematicians where a consideration of
standards is relevant, for example in an inter-school competition. However,
it should not be assumed that a consideration of standards will mean that a
disabled pupil will be barred from an activity.
Example:
A school regularly takes part in football matches with other local schools and
selects its best footballers to play in the team. A pupil who is a wheelchair
user is very keen on sport, but not able to play football at the necessary
standard to be chosen for the team. The school is not required, as a
reasonable adjustment, to select him for the team, because it is permitted to
select only the best football players.
The interests of other pupils and prospective pupils
6.48 Ordinarily, the interests of other pupils regarding the reasonable
adjustments required by a disabled pupil will be irrelevant. However, there
are limited circumstances in which the provision of a particular reasonable
adjustment for a disabled pupil will disadvantage other pupils. This is
relevant only where the adjustment results in significant disadvantage for
other pupils. In such a case, it may not be reasonable to expect the school
to make the adjustment.
103
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A disabled pupil has a skin condition that is aggravated by cold and his
parents ask that his classroom is kept at a very hot temperature. However,
this would mean that the other pupils in the class would be uncomfortably hot.
The school may not be expected to keep the classroom at the requested
temperature, but it could take other steps, such as raising the classroom
temperature to a level that is still comfortable for other pupils, placing the
pupil in the hottest part of the room, such as by a radiator, and relaxing the
school uniform policy to allow him to wear warmer and more comfortable
clothing.
6.49 There will, however, be other instances in which there is a duty to make an
adjustment despite some inconvenience to others. In deciding what
adjustments are reasonable, it is important to weigh the level of
inconvenience to others against the substantial disadvantage faced by the
disabled pupil.
104
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
A primary school plans a school trip to a local history museum in its town
to undertake some activities. One of the pupils in the class is deaf and,
because the museum does not have a hearing loop installed, she will be
unable to participate in the trip. The school decides to change the trip
and attend a museum in a neighbouring town, which has a hearing loop.
Although this will cause some inconvenience to the other pupils because
the travel time to and from school is longer, the school decides that this
is a reasonable adjustment to make given the substantial disadvantage
faced by the disabled pupil if she is unable to attend the trip.
A secondary school takes its year 7 pupils on a week-long outdoor
activity course every year. The school always goes to the same place,
which offers a wide range of exciting activities in which the pupils can
participate. This year, one of the year 7 disabled pupils has to have
kidney dialysis on a daily basis, so needs to be able to return home
every day. In deciding on what adjustment to make for the disabled
pupil, the school considers cancelling the trip and seeking an alternative,
such as day trips closer to the school. The school weighs up whether
denying pupils the opportunity to attend the week-long trip is reasonable
and decides to stick with the planned trip to the outdoor activities centre
so that pupils do not miss out on this valuable residential experience,
and are not required to travel to and from activities each day. But, to
minimise the disadvantage faced by the disabled pupil, the school
arrange for transport from his home to attend the centre for day visits on
three days of the week, so that the pupil has the benefit of being able to
participate in the activities with his peers. If the school had not made this
adjustment, he would not have been able to participate at all. This is
likely to be a reasonable step for the school to have to take. It is unlikely
to be reasonable for the school to have to alter its decision to undertake
the week-long activities course.
Charging for providing reasonable adjustments
6.50 It is unlawful for a school to charge a pupil for making a reasonable
adjustment in any circumstances, whatever the financial cost to the school
and however the school is funded. However, as set out in paragraph 6.26,
the cost of an adjustment is one of the factors to be taken into account
when considering whether or not the adjustment is reasonable.
s20(7)
105
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
An independent school provides a dyslexic disabled pupil with overlay sheets
to assist him in reading text, along with weekly sessions with a specialist
teacher. The school adds the cost of these adjustments to the pupil's school
fees. This would be discrimination.
Frequently asked questions (FAQs)
Auxiliary aids
6.51 What has changed since September 2012?
Schools and local authorities now have additional obligations towards disabled
pupils to provide what are called 'auxiliary aids and services' to overcome
disadvantages that these pupils experience in schools.
6.52 Is that not something with which the SEN framework deals?
Many disabled children will have statements of SEN or EHC plans and
auxiliary aids that are necessary as part of their SEN provision will be provided
through the statement or EHC plan. In these cases, the schools will be under
no obligation to duplicate that support. The great majority of children with SEN
do not have statements or EHC plans, however, and that will include disabled
children who require auxiliary aids or services to prevent them being at a
substantial disadvantage.
Many schools will already be doing this and so it will add little or nothing to
their existing regime. But it is important that all staff know about these new
obligations.
6.53 What if we do not have the money or resources to do this?
The Act obliges schools to make only 'reasonable' adjustments. Cost and
resources are factors that are taken into account in determining what is
'reasonable'. It is important to document carefully any decisions taken on
reasonable adjustments, so that they can be justified to parents and/or a
tribunal.
6.54 What sort of things might we have to do?
Schools may have to provide a disabled pupil with:
A piece of equipment
Assistance from a sign language interpreter, lip-speaker or deaf-blind
communicator
Extra staff assistance
106
Technical guidance for schools in England
An electronic or manual notetaking service
Induction loop or infrared broadcast system
Videophones
Audiovisual fire alarms
Readers for people with visual impairments
Assistance with guiding
An adapted keyboard
Specialised computer software
6.55 If a school provides a disabled pupil with a piece of equipment, whose
responsibility is it to ensure that the equipment is looked after and is
repaired when necessary?
The reasonable adjustments duty includes making sure that the reasonable
adjustment provided actually works, so the school would be responsible for the
maintenance and repair of the piece of equipment. However, schools may
want to work with other schools in their local area or with the local authority to
share resources both in terms of equipment, and the maintenance and repair
of equipment.
6.56 Are individual schools expected to meet the cost of auxiliary aids and
services if they already pay into a central local authority budget to
meet such costs?
Centrally organised and funded aids and services are often the most effective
and efficient way of meeting the needs of disabled children. In some situations,
individual schools pay an amount into a local authority 'pot' set up to meet the
cost of access needs and are able to draw on that pot for such needs; or a
local authority may provide auxiliary aids and services out of funds that it would
otherwise pass on to schools for such aids and services. It is unlikely, in these
circumstances, to be reasonable for an individual school to pay any more in
providing additional aids and services.
6.57 A pupil needs a hearing aid when at school, but also when not at
school. Should the school be providing the hearing aid for the child to
use all of the time?
The school's duty is to avoid the substantial disadvantage experienced by the
disabled pupil while he or she is accessing the education and other benefits,
facilities and services that the school provides to pupils. A school is not
required to provide anything that the pupil requires outside of education - but
there may be circumstances in which the school allows the pupil to use a piece
of equipment provided by it in other circumstances. For example, where a
school has provided a pupil with an MP3 player in order to record lesson
notes, it may then allow the pupil to use that MP3 player when attending a
holiday club.
6.58 Can a school charge disabled pupils or their parents for the additional
cost of providing auxiliary aids?
107
Technical guidance for schools in England
No. The Act prohibits schools from passing on the cost of reasonable
adjustments to the disabled pupil or his or her parents.
6.59 It can be difficult to include disabled pupils on residential school trips.
Would it be better to cancel such trips to ensure that disabled pupils
are not discriminated against?
The Act does not require a school to cancel school trips or any other activities
arranged for pupils, but it does require a school to look at ways in which to
ensure that disabled pupils are given the same opportunities to participate as
other pupils. This might include considering alternative trips to those previously
arranged by the school, providing additional assistance to enable the disabled
pupil to attend or allowing the disabled pupil to attend for only some of the trip.
By working with disabled pupils and their parents, who will have experience of
taking their children on trips and outings, and learning from the experiences of
other schools, schools are likely to be able to come up with solutions that
mean that everyone is able to benefit from the trip or activity.
Other issues
6.60 If a school does not know that a pupil is disabled, is it still required to
make reasonable adjustments?
In the majority of cases, schools will be aware of a child's disability for a
number of reasons, such as the arrangements for the assessment of and the
provision of special educational needs through the SEN framework. In many
cases, parents will volunteer information about their child's disability. It may not
be immediately obvious that a child is disabled. Underachievement and
unexplained behaviour may, in some cases, indicate an underlying disability
that has not yet been identified.
The duty to make reasonable adjustments is an anticipatory duty. This means
that it requires consideration of, and action in relation to, barriers that impede
people with one or more kinds of disability prior to an individual disabled pupil
seeking to access the school. Schools should therefore not wait until a
disabled person approaches them before they give consideration to their duty
to make reasonable adjustments, and should anticipate the requirements of
disabled pupils and the adjustments that may have to be made for them.
6.61 If a pupil asks a school to keep his or her disability confidential, does
this mean that a school does not have to make any adjustments?
Disabled pupils and their parents have a right to request that a pupil's disability
be treated as confidential. In this case, what is reasonable for the school to do
must be consistent with the request for confidentiality. The school still has a
duty to make reasonable adjustments, but might make different adjustments
from those that it would have made if there had not been a confidentiality
request.
6.62 Does the duty apply to independent schools?
108
Technical guidance for schools in England
The duty applies to all schools in England irrespective of how they are funded
or managed.
Case studies
Example:
A child with a recent diagnosis of dyslexia and Asperger's syndrome attends
an independent school, and has been refused a statutory assessment by his
local authority. His parents believe that he needs some one-to-one support
and specialist teaching, because he is falling behind his peers.
6.63 Is he at a substantial disadvantage?
Because he is falling behind with his schoolwork, this may be an indication that
the pupil is at a substantial disadvantage. If the school doubts that he is at a
substantial disadvantage, then it could carry out or arrange an assessment to
obtain more information about any disadvantage that he is experiencing (and
about the steps that could be taken to avoid any substantial disadvantage).
6.64 Could the disadvantage be avoided?
If the assessment shows that the pupil is at a substantial disadvantage
compared to non-disabled pupils, some one-to-one support and specialist
teaching could help the school to avoid the disadvantage. If it suggests that he
is not at a substantial disadvantage, then the school is not required to make
any reasonable adjustments.
6.65 Is it reasonable for the school to take these steps?
This will depend on the resources available to the school and the other factors
listed in paragraph 6.26. If the school feels that this is support that should be
provided by the local authority through an EHC plan, then the school could
advise the parents of this and of how to request a statutory assessment. The
school can also request that the local authority carries out a statutory
assessment.
109
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A disabled pupil requires assistance with personal care needs, such as
toileting, washing and dressing. This assistance is provided during the school
day by a learning support assistant provided through his EHC plan. The
school arranges a residential school trip for his year group. The pupil wishes
to attend, but is not able to do so unless his personal care needs are met.
6.66 Is he at a substantial disadvantage?
Yes: he is unable to attend the trip with his peers. This means that he is
missing out on an additional valuable learning experience available to non-
disabled pupils in his class.
6.67 Could the disadvantage be avoided?
The following options could avoid the disadvantage and enable the pupil to
attend:
asking his learning support assistant to go on the trip and provide support
beyond the normal school day;
liaising with social services to see if any support can be provided by them;
and
discussing with the pupil and his parents ways in which they think the
support could be provided, such as a family member going on the trip to
provide the overnight support.
6.68 Is it reasonable for the school to take these steps?
These steps are all potentially reasonable depending on the circumstances. If
it is not possible for the school to find a reasonable means of enabling the
pupil to attend, then it should consider whether there is an alternative
equivalent trip that could be organised for that year group in which the disabled
pupil would be able to participate.
110
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A pupil with physical difficulties starts at a primary school partway through the
school year, having recently moved to the UK from abroad. His parents
request that the local authority carry out a statutory assessment, because
they think that he will need an EHC plan. It is likely that any additional support
that he needs will be provided through an EHC plan, but in the meantime,
until the statutory assessment process is completed and an EHC plan issued,
the pupil is struggling to access education, because he is unable to move
around the school without assistance and needs help with writing, and with
lifting and moving books and other learning materials.
6.69 Is he at a substantial disadvantage?
Yes. He is unable to access education in the same way as his peers.
6.70 Could the disadvantage be avoided by the provision of an auxiliary aid
or service?
Yes - by means of individual and specialist support.
6.71 Is it reasonable for the school to take this step?
Although support would ultimately be provided through his EHC plan, it is likely
to be reasonable for the school to put in place at least some support to enable
the pupil to access education in the meantime.
Example:
A child with Asperger's syndrome attends a school and is provided with
transport in the form of a school bus that stops near to her home and then
goes to the school. She wants to attend an afterschool activity and, although
there is a bus that she could catch home, she would need to change buses
and is not familiar with the route.
6.72 Is she at a substantial disadvantage?
Yes. She cannot attend the afterschool activity.
6.73 Could the disadvantage be avoided by the provision of an auxiliary aid
or service?
Yes - by providing individual transport. Alternatively, the school could support
the pupil to develop her independent travelling skills, which might include
someone escorting her on the bus the first few times or practising the route
with her.
6.74 Is it reasonable for the school to take this step?
111
Technical guidance for schools in England
There are specific arrangements in place for transporting disabled learners to
and from school, but this is not part of the Equality Act 2010. The reasonable
adjustments duty on after-school activity providers, where they are operating
independently from the school, does not include transport to and from the
premises. The law regarding provision of transport for education purposes falls
on the local authority to provide transport to and from school during the
compulsory part of the school day, which ensures that disabled children are
able to attend school.
There may be some flexibility where the after school provision is provided for,
or commissioned by, the school, hence is a benefit, facility or service provided
by the school, and this could include the support described above. Also, in
circumstances where transport is being provided for non-disabled learners for
after-school activities, such transport must be fully accessible for disabled
learners as well. The transport provider may well charge for this transport, but
is not allowed to charge more for disabled learners.
112
Technical guidance for schools in England
Chapter 7 Positive action
What is 'positive action?
7.1 'Positive action' is the term used to describe action that the Act allows
schools to take to counter the effects of past or present discrimination
experienced by groups of pupils who share a protected characteristic, to
meet the particular needs of pupils in such groups, or to facilitate their
participation in activities in which participation by members of their group is
disproportionately low.
7.2 Positive action might therefore be used to address things such as:
Low participation of girls in certain subjects, resulting in future economic
disadvantage
Low achievement of Gypsy and Traveller pupils
High numbers of exclusions of black Caribbean pupils
High levels of bullying of lesbian, gay and bisexual (LGB) pupils
7.3 Positive action can include providing additional or bespoke education,
benefits, facilities or services, separate facilities, or targeting resources or
opportunities to benefit a particular disadvantaged group.
7.4 Positive action is about addressing the needs of pupils in a group who
share a protected characteristic. It is not about giving preferential treatment
to a particular pupil because of a protected characteristic. That is positive
discrimination, which is unlawful under the Act in most circumstances.
7.5 Measures that are permitted by the Act's positive action provisions are
lawful even if they involve discrimination against members of other groups
that might otherwise be unlawful under the Act.
7.6 Schools have no duty to take positive action. However, by taking
appropriate and proportionate positive action, schools are likely to improve
their education and services for pupils, and to overcome barriers for
particular groups of pupils. Also, schools that are subject to the public
sector equality duty (schools maintained by a local authority and
academies) may wish to consider using positive action to help them to
comply with the duty and improve outcomes for particular groups of pupils.
What does the Act say?
7.7 The Act says that where a school reasonably thinks that pupils who share a
protected characteristic:
113
Technical guidance for schools in England
a) experience a disadvantage connected to that characteristic, or
b) have needs that are different from the needs of persons who do not share
that protected characteristic, or
c) have disproportionately low participation in an activity compared to those
who do not share that characteristic,
then the school may take any action that is proportionate to meet any of the
aims stated in the Act.
s158(1)
7.8 Those aims (known as 'the stated aims') are:
a) enabling or encouraging persons who share the protected characteristic to
overcome or minimise that disadvantage,
b) meeting those different needs, or
c) enabling or encouraging persons who share the protected characteristic to
participate in that activity.
s158(2)
Basic requirements for taking positive action
7.9 There are two basic requirements for taking positive action.
The first requirement is that the school must reasonably think that one or
more of the three circumstances in which positive action may be taken has
arisen.
The second requirement is that the action the school takes must be
proportionate to meet the relevant stated aims.
7.10 The first requirement means that there must be some indication or evidence
to show that one or more of the relevant circumstances has arisen.
However, it does not require a school to have sophisticated statistical data
or research to show that this is the case; it may simply involve looking at
the profiles of pupils and/or making enquiries of other schools in the area.
Schools have a wealth of data that can be used as a basis for action, as
well as relevant external research. A decision to take positive action could
be based on quantitative evidence of underperformance by pupils with a
protected characteristic, qualitative evidence such as consultations or focus
group work with pupils and staff, equality impact assessments, surveys
showing poor experience of an area of provision related to a protected
characteristic, complaints and discrimination claims, or evidence of similar
problems gathered by other schools.
114
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A school reviews its data on exclusions and finds that a disproportionate
number of pupils who have been either temporarily or permanently excluded
are black Caribbean boys. The school also looks at data held at the local and
national level, which supports the school's own evidence. The school then
runs some focus groups with pupils and parents from black Caribbean
backgrounds to understand the reasons why these pupils are facing higher
levels of exclusions. Following the consultation, the school implements a
whole-school policy on tackling racial equality and a programme of positive
action that specifically targets these boys' needs. This includes parent and
pupil workshops, visits from black role models, learning mentors, and classes
on emotional literacy, assertiveness, socialisation and anger management
skills.
7.11 The second requirement - that the action is proportionate to meet the
relevant stated aims - means that consideration must be given to any
relevant competing factors. The seriousness of the relevant disadvantage,
the degree to which the need is different and the extent of the low
participation in the activity concerned will need to be balanced against the
impact of the action on other protected groups and the relative
disadvantage, need or degree of participation of those groups.
7.12 Before taking positive action, a school should ask itself the following
questions.
Is the action an appropriate way in which to achieve the stated aim?
If so, is the proposed action reasonably necessary to achieve the aim -
that is, in all of the circumstances, would it be possible to achieve the aim
as effectively by other actions that are less likely to result in other people
being treated less favourably than those for whom the action is taken?
115
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
A primary school analyses its data and finds out that boys' literacy levels
are lower compared to girls' overall. The school decides to meet its aim
of increasing boys' literacy by running additional literacy classes for all
boys, adopting different learning styles and more intensive support for
pupils. This is unlikely to be a proportionate means of achieving a
legitimate aim. It would involve less favourable treatment of female
pupils who are underachieving, and would not meet the appropriate and
necessary test, since not all boys are underachieving in literacy.
A secondary school reviews its data on participation in PE and discovers
that female Muslim pupils are far less likely to take part in swimming
lessons than other groups of pupils. After speaking with pupils and
parents, it is found that the mixed-sex swimming classes and the type of
swimming costume are key barriers preventing these pupils from
participating. The school decides to run separate swimming lessons for
female Muslim pupils, with a female swimming instructor, and makes a
change to the PE uniform to allow a full-body swimming costume to be
worn, as opposed to a regular one-piece costume. This is likely to be a
proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim. Although this would
involve less favourable treatment of other pupils who will not have
access to these lessons, the action could meet the appropriate and
necessary test, since it is likely to be effective in increasing participation
of female Muslim pupils in swimming classes and there is no obvious
alternative approach that would meet this aim. The less favourable
treatment would be balanced by the fact that other female and male
pupils have similar amounts of access to swimming classes, and non-
Muslim female pupils are permitted to wear a similar style of swimming
costume if requested.
Taking action to overcome or minimise disadvantage
7.13 This is the first of the stated aims for which schools may take positive
action. The Act does not define what 'disadvantage' means, but it includes
exclusion, rejection, lack of opportunity or choice, and barriers to accessing
provision.
s158(2) (a)
116
Technical guidance for schools in England
7.14 The only limit that the Act places on positive action to overcome or
minimise disadvantage is that it must be a proportionate means of
achieving this aim. So positive action could include action to identify
possible causes of the disadvantage through consultation and surveys, or a
review of data, and then:
targeting provision at specific disadvantaged groups, for example through
advertisements, outreach programmes and special arrangements to
encourage increased take-up;
aiming provision specifically at a disadvantaged group;
making provision in a different way, at different times, at different locations;
and/or
making specific provision for a disadvantaged group only.
7.15 Positive action to overcome disadvantage may be both enabling, such as
providing a group with specific provision, and/or encouraging, such as
advertising a provision in a publication aimed at a particular group.
Example:
A school is aware, from monitoring data and observations, that few Asian
parents attend parent-teacher meetings and so they are missing valuable
opportunities to discuss their children's education. A focus group identifies
that the issue is a lack of interpretation services. The school arranges for a
series of specific Asian parents' evenings at which interpreting is provided if
required. This would be a lawful positive action taken to minimise
disadvantage.
Taking action to meet different needs
7.16 The second of the stated aims for which positive action may be taken is to
target the needs of pupils who share a protected characteristic where those
needs are different from the needs of pupils who do not share that
characteristic. Such needs may arise because of past or present
discrimination or disadvantage, or because of other factors that apply in
particular to pupils who share a protected characteristic.
s158(2) (b)
7.17 However, the needs of pupils who share a protected characteristic can be
different from the needs of others, without those needs being entirely
unique. Needs may also be different because of a disproportionate failure
to meet those needs in comparison with the needs of other groups, or
because of the particular importance of the need to the group in question.
117
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
Girls may need specific interventions to encourage them to study a non-
traditional subject and there is evidence that Muslim girls may need additional
support to address certain cultural issues.
7.18 The only limit that the Act places on positive action to meet different needs
is that it must be a proportionate means of achieving this aim. So positive
action could include:
providing education at a particular time;
developing different ways of making provision more suited to the needs of
particular groups (such as girl-only swimming lessons taught by a female
teacher for Muslim girls); and/or
making additional provision specifically to meet particular needs, such as
additional English language classes for pupils whose first language is not
English.
Example:
A school analyses its pupil destination data, and becomes aware that black
Caribbean boys are disproportionately more likely to leave school at the age
of 16 and not continue in education or training. The school is aware of gradual
disengagement from education by these pupils from the age of 14. The
school decides to run activities for black Caribbean boys from age 14 to try to
raise aspirations and prevent this disengagement. These activities include
targeted careers education, giving the pupils the opportunity to visit local
employers and training providers, and being assigned a mentor from the
same background studying at university.
Taking action to encourage participation
7.19 The third and final reason for which positive action may be taken is to
enable or encourage pupils who share a protected characteristic to
participate in an activity in which participation by people who have that
characteristic is disproportionately low. It follows that there will need to be
some reliable indication or evidence that participation in the activity in
question by people with the protected characteristic is low compared to
participation by members of other groups, adjusted if necessary to allow for
relevant factors such as type of school and locality.
s158(2) (c)
118
Technical guidance for schools in England
7.20 Positive action may be taken not only to facilitate access to the activity
itself, but also to enable or encourage experiences of undertaking the
activity and completion of it. It includes activities undertaken, organised or
facilitated by a school, and might include school trips abroad or careers
events, for example. It could also allow schools to address the low take-up
of particular courses by a particular pupil group, such as the low take-up of
science courses by girls.
7.21 The only limit that the Act places on positive action to encourage
participation is that it must be a proportionate means of achieving this aim.
So positive action could include:
providing training or additional classes targeted at pupils with a particular
protected characteristic;
extending or changing locations or times for activities to take place;
making the provision in different ways;
targeting advertisements and prospectuses, and sources of advice;
improving careers advice and providing mentoring for pupils who have the
protected characteristic; and/or
using outreach and monitoring.
119
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A school analyses its data on the types of work experience placement taken
by its pupils and finds that girls are far less likely to undertake a placement
with science, engineering and technology employers than are boys. The
school carries out some additional evidence-gathering and finds that this
under-representation extends to further and higher education, and into wider
employment, and that gender segregation in the workplace is one of the main
causes of the gender pay gap. The school decides to implement a
programme to increase the numbers of female pupils undertaking placements
in science, engineering and technology. It runs a construction and
engineering industry awareness day for female pupils. The day starts with a
visit to two local employers, where pupils are encouraged to try out the
equipment. This is followed by a tour of the local further education college to
meet apprentices, and to hear from women working in construction and
engineering. The school follows up on this initial taster event by working with
the local education business partnership to find work placements with local
employers.
Implementing and monitoring positive action
7.22 It is good practice for schools, when considering positive action, to draw up
an action plan that sets out:
evidence of the disadvantage, particular needs and/or disproportionately
low levels of participation, as appropriate, and an analysis of the causes;
specific outcomes that the school is aiming to achieve;
an identification of possible steps;
an assessment of the proportionality of those possible steps;
the steps that the school decides to take to achieve its aims; and
measurable indicators of progress towards those aims, set against a
timetable.
7.23 It is also good practice for schools to consult with groups of pupils who
share the protected characteristic in question before deciding whether to
take positive action, because this is likely to be helpful in identifying needs
and evaluating possible actions. In addition, of course, it is advisable for
schools to explain to staff, parents and pupils why positive action is being
taken and what it comprises.
120
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A secondary school has a number of lesbian, gay and bisexual (LGB) pupils
and pupils whose parents are LGB. The school wants to ensure that any
barriers to learning that these pupils are facing are tackled by means of
appropriate measures. The school decides to run a small consultation group
with the pupils, which is facilitated with the help of a local LGB charity, to
understand their needs better.
The group reports several barriers affecting these pupils' school experience,
including homophobic bullying, which is contributing to underachievement and
putting some pupils at the risk of dropping out.
The group make several suggestions for positive action activities to address
these barriers, alongside a whole-school approach to tackling homophobic
bullying. These include setting up a mentor programme for LGB pupils,
offering LGB pupils a chance to meet with other pupils who are tackling
homophobia in their schools and running various activities for lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender (LGBT) history month.
7.24 If a school takes positive action, it should monitor the impact that the action
is having and regularly review progress towards the identified aim. Not only
will this help the school to see whether the action it is taken is successful,
but it will also help the school to make sure that the action continues to be
lawful. This is because action might cease to be proportionate if
circumstances change so that the conditions for taking the action no longer
apply. For the same reason, it is good practice for schools to plan to take
positive action for a set period only and for the position to be reviewed at
the end of that period.
121
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
A school IT coordinator sets up a 'computer club for girls' to try to
address the low numbers of female pupils studying IT. Other schools
have found that the clubs encourage girls to get involved with IT who
may be discouraged by the male-dominated environment common in
many school computer labs. The clubs allow girls to explore things at
their own pace and to follow their interests in a supportive environment.
The aims of the club are explained to staff, and a newsletter is sent to all
parents to explain the aims of the club and that it is going to run for just
one year initially to see if it tackles the issue.
A school has a large intake of refugee pupils from Afghanistan. The
school decides to employ a support worker to work with the pupils to
help them to settle in at the school. The school monitors the pupils'
integration into the school and decides, after one year, that the pupils
have integrated well into school life. At this time, it is decided that the
support worker is no longer needed.
Positive action and the public sector equality duty
7.25 Schools maintained by a local authority and academies are subject to the
public sector equality duty, and may wish to consider using positive action
to help them to comply with the duty.
s149(1), (3)
122
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
When deciding on what action to take under the public sector equality duty,
an academy analyses its data on attainment at key stage 4 and finds that
Bangladeshi pupils are underachieving compared to other pupils when
previous attainment is taken into account.
The school sets an objective under the duty to tackle the underachievement
of Bangladeshi pupils. In order to achieve this, it plans to undertake a range
of activities, including study skills support, mentoring and additional classes.
These activities act as positive action measures and also contribute to
meeting the duty to advance equality of opportunity.
Frequently asked questions (FAQs)
7.26 What is the difference between action that is always lawful under the
Act, positive action and positive discrimination?
Action taken to benefit those from one particular protected group that does not
involve less favourable treatment of those from another protected group, or to
eradicate discriminatory policies or practices, will normally be lawful. For
schools, this may include steps to improve awareness of and access to
education, adjusting the benefits, facilities and services to meet the particular
needs of a protected group, or training staff to recognise such needs.
However, such actions would not be classed as 'positive action'.
Actions that fall within the framework of the Act's positive action provisions are
lawful only if they meet the statutory conditions for positive action measures
and as long as they do not exceed the limitations set out in the Act.
Actions that involve preferential treatment - often referred to as 'positive
discrimination' - to benefit members of a disadvantaged or under-represented
group who share a protected characteristic in order to address inequality, but
which do not meet the statutory requirements for positive action, will be
unlawful unless a statutory exception applies.
123
Technical guidance for schools in England
Examples:
-
In monitoring the gender breakdown of A-level design and technology, a
school notes the low number of girls choosing to study the subject. The
school considers the following actions to improve girls' participation in
the subject.
-
Inviting a female designer to come and speak to students at an
assembly, and asking female students studying design and technology
at a local university to run some activities at the school design and
technology club to try to encourage more girls to get involved in the
subject None of these steps are likely to involve less favourable
treatment of any other group sharing another protected characteristic
and so such actions would be lawful without having to rely on the
positive action provisions of the Act.
Arranging girls-only sessions in design and technology, and
opportunities for the female pupils to shadow a female designer in the
workplace. While these steps involve more favourable treatment of
female pupils, the disadvantage to other groups of pupils is likely to be
outweighed by the benefit of increasing participation of female pupils.
Because these steps are proportionate ways of achieving the school's
aim, they would be lawful under the Act's positive action provisions.
Setting different entry requirements for female and male pupils onto A-
level courses, it being suggested that while boys are required by the
school to have studied design and technology at GCSE level to get onto
the A-level course, girls should not have to meet this requirement before
being accepted for the A-level course. While these steps could increase
participation by female pupils, they involve preferential treatment of
female pupils and less favourable treatment of male pupils, who have
different entry requirements placed on them. Because there are less
discriminatory steps that the school could take to increase participation
by female pupils, these steps are unlikely to be a proportionate means
of achieving this aim and therefore are likely to be unlawful.
124
Technical guidance for schools in England
Chapter 8
Dispute resolution
and enforcement
8.1 This chapter explains what happens if someone makes a complaint under
the Act against a school and what routes of redress exist. It also explains
what action may be taken to put right any discrimination, harassment or
victimisation that is found to have taken place.
8.2 This section is not intended to be a procedural guide to making a claim in
the county court or to the First-Tier Tribunal (Special Educational needs
and Disability) in England.
8.3 The civil courts procedure for England is contained in the Civil Procedure
Rules 1998 and user-friendly guides to making a claim in the county court
can be found on the Commission's website. The procedures for the
tribunals are contained in regulations that are available from the tribunals'
website. In addition, each tribunal publishes detailed and user-friendly
guides to making a claim.
Resolving disputes
8.4 It is usually in everyone's best interests to attempt to resolve disputes
without the need for legal action. In many instances, the pupil (or his or her
parent acting on his or her behalf) who believes that he or she has been
discriminated against will want to raise the complaint directly with the
school. All schools should have complaints procedures in place, which
should be able to deal with complaints of discrimination, harassment and
victimisation. The governing bodies of maintained schools in England are
required, under S 29(1) of the Education Act 2002, to have a complaints
procedure to deal with all complaints relating to the school.
8.5 It is good practice for schools to make pupils and parents aware of the
complaints procedure, and to ensure that it is accessible to everyone, for
example by making it available in different languages or formats, if
appropriate.
125
Technical guidance for schools in England
8.6 Defending a claim can be lengthy, expensive and draining, and it can have
a damaging impact on a school's reputation. It is likely to be in everyone's
interest to try to put things right before a claim is brought. However, there
will be occasions on which pursuing a school's complaint procedure will be
neither practical nor appropriate. The timescales for making a claim in the
county court or tribunal are not extended if a complaint is made through a
school's internal complaints procedure.
8.7 Schools must make reasonable adjustments to any internal complaints
procedures to prevent disabled people from being placed at a substantial
disadvantage in comparison with people who are not disabled. Failure to do
so will itself amount to discrimination.
8.8 Parents can also make a complaint to Ofsted about a maintained school if
the complaint affects the school as a whole rather than an individual pupil.
Ofsted will not deal with complaints where there is an alternative legal
remedy.
8.9 The secretary of state can give directions, using powers under the
Education Act 1996, to require a maintained school or a non-maintained
special school in England to comply with its obligations under the Equality
Act. This enables the secretary of state to require a school to stop a
discriminatory practice or policy even if no complaint has been brought by
an individual pupil or prospective pupil.
Obtaining information ('the questions procedure')
8.10 Before starting legal proceedings, it may be helpful to the person
considering bringing proceedings to obtain information from the school, to
help him or her to decide whether or not he or she has a valid claim.
s138
Breaches of the Act before 6 April 2014
8.11 Any pupil (or his or her parent on his or her behalf) who thinks that he or
she was the subject of an unlawful act before 6 April 2014 may request
information from the school using the question and answer procedure in
s.138 of the Equality Act 2010. This is known as the 'questions procedure'
and it is additional to other means of obtaining information under the courts
or tribunal rules. The questions and answers are admissible in evidence in
court and tribunal proceedings.
126
Technical guidance for schools in England
8.12 If a school does not respond to the questionnaire within eight weeks, then
the court or tribunal can take that into account when making a judgment.
The court or tribunal can also take into account answers that are evasive or
unclear, except where the failure to respond is because answering
differently might prejudice a criminal matter.
8.13 In addition to the formal questions procedure, a person who is considering
making a claim can write to the school asking for information, and that
correspondence can be used as evidence. If the school fails to respond,
then the court or Tribunal can be asked to take that into account.
Breaches of the Act on or after 6 April 2014
8.14 The questions procedure was abolished on 6 April 2014. 5 It will continue to
apply to complaints about breaches of the Equality Act 2010 that happened
before 6 April 2014. 6 It will remain good practice for a pupil (or their parent
on their behalf) who thinks that they may have been unlawfully
discriminated against, harassed or victimised under the Equality Act 2010
to seek relevant information before issuing a formal claim. This may prevent
the complaint escalating to a formal claim
The Government Equalities Office has issued a good practice guide on asking
and responding to questions about discrimination in the provision of services
and public functions including education services.
5 S.138 of the Equality Act 2010 was repealed by s.66 of the Enterprise and
Regulatory Reform Act 2013 which was brought into effect from 6 April 2014 by
the Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Act 2013 (Commencement No.6,
Transitional Provisions and Savings Order 2014).
6 S.66(2) of the Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Act 2013.
127
Technical guidance for schools in England
Time limits
8.15 A claim must normally be started within six months of the alleged
discrimination. Where there has been a continuing process of discrimination
taking place over a period of time, the six months begins at the date of the
last discriminatory act. However, where the continuing act is a failure to do
something, then the six months begins from either the date on which the
person said that he or she was not going to do it, or from the date on which
he or she could have reasonably been expected to do it. However, an
ongoing failure to do something is treated as having happened when the
person in question decided not to take the action. In the absence of
evidence showing when the decision was made, a person is taken to have
decided to fail to do something when he or she either carries out an act
inconsistent with doing it or on the expiry of the period in which he or she
might reasonably have been expected to do it.
s118; Sch 17, para 4
8.16 Courts and tribunals have the discretion to consider a claim brought outside
the six-month period if they consider that it is fair to do so, but they are not
required to do so.
s118; Sch 17, para 4
Where claims are made
8.17 All claims in relation to protected characteristics other than disability are
made to the county court.
8.18 Disability discrimination claims are made according to the following table.
128
Technical guidance for schools in England
Claim (in England)
Forum
Admission decisions for schools
Admission appeal panels
maintained by local authorities,
including community schools,
voluntary aided and voluntary
controlled schools, and foundation
schools and academies, and free
schools
All other claims (including all claims
First-tier Tribunal (Special Educational
against independent schools)
Needs and Disability)
Claims brought in the county court
Who can make a claim?
8.19 Anyone can make a claim to the county court if he or she believes that he
or she has been discriminated against, harassed or victimised. A person
who does not have mental capacity, or who is under school leaving age, will
have to make a claim through a 'litigation friend' - that is, an adult
appointed to conduct the claim on his or her behalf (often, but not always,
his or her parent).
s114(1)
Remedies
8.20 The county court has the power to award all of the remedies that the High
Court can grant in proceedings in tort or in a claim for judicial review. These
remedies include:
A declaration that unlawful discrimination, harassment or victimisation has
taken place, or a declaration that no unlawful discrimination, harassment or
victimisation has taken place
An injunction requiring the school to do something (such as to admit the
child as a pupil) or to prevent the school from repeating any discriminatory
act in the future
Damages to compensate for any loss suffered by the person bringing the
claim, including compensation for injury to feelings
Interest on any compensation
129
Technical guidance for schools in England
Costs
s119
Disability discrimination tribunal claims
What claims can the tribunal hear?
8.21 Disability discrimination claims against schools in England are heard by the
First-tier Tribunal (Special Educational Needs and Disability), except for
claims about maintained school and academy admissions decisions, which
are heard by admission appeal panels (see paragraphs 8.26-8.29).
Sch 17
8.22 Any references to 'tribunal' in this section include a reference to both of
these tribunals.
Who can make a claim?
8.23 The parent of a disabled child can make a claim that his or her child has
been discriminated against.
8.24 A child cannot make a claim in his or her own right.
What can the tribunal order?
8.25 The tribunal may make any order that it thinks appropriate in that individual
case, often with the intention of trying to remedy the damage done to the
disabled person and to reduce any future disadvantage.
8.26 The tribunal cannot order the payment of compensation. Examples of the
type of remedies ordered by the tribunal include:
A letter of apology
Staff training
Changes to policies and procedures
Additional education for a pupil who has missed education
An additional school trip for a pupil who has missed a trip
130
Technical guidance for schools in England
Disability discrimination claims against
admission decisions of maintained schools and
academies
Admission appeal panels
8.27 Admission appeal panels are independent appeal panels set up, by the
admissions authority for the school, to hear appeals against admissions
decisions for maintained schools and academies. They also deal with
disability discrimination claims in relation to admissions decisions for
maintained schools and academies.
8.28 They cannot deal with discrimination claims in relation to any other
protected characteristics; these are dealt with by the courts.
8.29 They cannot hear disability discrimination claims about admission decisions
of independent schools; these are heard by tribunals.
8.30 They cannot hear disability discrimination claims about admissions
arrangements or about terms being placed on a person's admission; these
are heard by tribunals.
Time limits
8.31 The appeals are organised by admission authorities, which are responsible
for the timetable for the appeals following admission decisions. Parents are
advised of the time limits and procedure at the same time as they are
advised of the admissions decision.
What can the panel order?
8.32 An admissions appeal panel can overturn the decision and order a school
to admit the child.
Who can make a claim?
8.33 The parent of a disabled child can appeal the decision (and make a claim of
disability discrimination).
8.34 In the case of a decision about sixth-form education, a young person and/or
his or her parent has a right of appeal (and therefore the right to make a
claim of disability discrimination) against the decision.
Procedure in England
8.35 The rules and procedures for admission appeal panels are set out in detail
in the Schools Admission Appeals Code produced by the Department for
Education (DfE) and available online at
131
Technical guidance for schools in England
The Commission
8.36 In addition to the rights given to an individual under the Act, the Equality
and Human Rights Commission has a power to apply to the court, if it
thinks that a person is likely to commit an unlawful act, for an injunction to
prohibit that person from committing that act.
EA 2006, s24
8.37 The Commission has power to take action even if no identifiable individual
has been, or may be, affected by the unlawful act. It can take action in
respect of arrangements that would, if they were ever applied to an
individual, amount to an unlawful act, for example to deal with the
publication of an advertisement that suggests that a school would
discriminate. This power could also be used to challenge a provision,
criterion or practice that indirectly discriminates, even if it has not yet put
any particular pupil at a disadvantage.
EA 2006, s24A
8.38 If the Commission suspects that a school has committed an unlawful act, it
can conduct an investigation. If it finds that the school has done so, it can
serve a notice requiring the school to prepare an action plan to avoid
repetition or continuation of that act, or recommend that it takes action for
that purpose.
EA 2006, s34; ss20-22; Sch 2
8.39 The Commission may also, if it suspects that a school is committing an
unlawful act, enter into a binding agreement with the school to avoid such
contraventions.
EA 2006, s23
8.40 The Commission also has a power to assist a pupil who is taking
enforcement action against a school.
EA 2006, s28
132
Technical guidance for schools in England
Chapter 9
Exceptions
9.1 This section gives an overview of the exceptions that apply generally
across the Act and therefore apply to schools, as well as exceptions that
apply only to certain types of school. Exceptions that relate to specific
school activities were explained in earlier chapters.
Residential schools
Communal accommodation
9.2 A school does not breach the prohibition of sex discrimination or gender
reassignment discrimination by doing anything in relation to admitting pupils
to communal accommodation, or providing any benefit, facility or service
linked to the accommodation, if the following criteria are satisfied.
Sch 23, para 3(1)
9.3 'Communal accommodation' is residential accommodation that includes
dormitories or other shared sleeping accommodation, which, for reasons of
privacy, should be used only by persons of the same sex. It can also
include residential accommodation that should be used only by persons of
the same sex because of the nature of the sanitary facilities serving the
accommodation.
Sch 23, para 3(5)
Example:
Where a school boarding block has dormitory-style accommodation, it would
be lawful for the school to restrict the block to only male or only female pupils.
9.4 Restricting admission to communal accommodation under this exception
will be lawful only if the accommodation is managed as fairly as possible for
both sexes.
Sch 23, para 3(2)
133
Technical guidance for schools in England
9.5 A benefit, facility or service is linked to communal accommodation if it
cannot properly and effectively be provided except for those using the
accommodation. It can be lawfully refused only if the person can lawfully be
refused use of the accommodation.
Sch 23, para 3(7)
Example:
It would be lawful to restrict access to the bathrooms in a single-sex boarding
block to those living in the boarding block.
9.6 In refusing to admit a pupil to communal accommodation because of sex or
gender reassignment, the school must take account of:
whether and how far it is reasonable to expect that the accommodation
should be altered or extended, or that further accommodation should be
provided; and
the relative frequency of demand or need for the accommodation by
persons of each sex.
Sch 23, para 3(3)
9.7 In addition, in refusing to admit a pupil to communal accommodation
because of gender reassignment, the school must also take account of
whether this is a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.
Sch 23, para 3(4)
Charity schools
9.8 A school that is a charity will not breach the Act by providing benefits only
to people who share a particular protected characteristic if this is in
accordance with the charitable instrument that establishes or governs the
charity, and is either:
a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim, or
for the purpose of preventing or compensating for a disadvantage linked to
that protected characteristic.
ss193, 194
134
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
It is lawful for the Royal National Institute for the Blind (RNIB) to run a school
for visually impaired pupils and not for other disabled pupils or non-disabled
pupils.
9.9 This exception does not apply if the group of people who are to receive
benefits under the charitable instrument is defined by their colour. If the
charitable instrument enables benefits to be provided to a group of persons
defined by their colour, then it has effect as if it enabled benefits to be
provided:
to other groups of persons if the group defined by colour is ignored, or
to all persons generally, if the group of people to receive benefits is defined
only by colour.
s194(2)
Activity to support a charity
9.10 In relation to activities promoting or supporting a charity, the Act permits the
restriction of participation in such an activity to persons of one sex, for
example a sponsored swim by only female pupils to raise money for charity.
s193(7)
General exceptions that apply across the Act
Competitive sport and sex discrimination
9.11 The Act includes an exception for sex discrimination in relation to a
competitive sport, game or other competitive activity.
s195
9.12 For sporting competitions in which physical strength, stamina or physique
are significant factors in determining success or failure, a school is allowed
to organise separate events for boys and girls.
9.13 If the physical strength, stamina or physique of the average pupil of one sex
would put him or her at a disadvantage compared to the average pupil of
the other sex as a competitor in a sport, game or other competitive activity,
it is not unlawful for those arranging the event to restrict participation in the
activity to pupils of one sex.
135
Technical guidance for schools in England
Example:
A secondary school holds an athletics day during which male and female
pupils compete in separate races. This is not unlawful sex discrimination.
9.14 In considering whether separate events should be organised for boys and
girls, the age and stage of development of the children competing in the
activity should be taken into account. Therefore this exception is much less
likely to apply to children of primary school age.
Competitive sport: nationality, birthplace or residency
9.15 In selecting one or more people to represent a country, place or area, or a
related association, in a sport, game or other competitive activity, or in
complying with eligibility rules for participation in that activity, it is lawful to
take into account a person's nationality or place of birth, or how long that
person has lived in a particular area or place.
s195
Statutory authority
9.16 There are limited circumstances in which the provisions of the Act are
overridden by other legal requirements. These exceptions are of narrow
application and are therefore likely to permit discrimination only in very rare
circumstances.
Statutory requirement
9.17 Where there is an express statutory requirement for a school to act in a
particular way, then the school's action will not be unlawful even if it
appears to breach the provisions of the Act. However, it is only in cases in
which a statutory requirement is specific, leaving a school with no choice
other than to act in a particular way, that the provisions of the Act may be
overridden.
s191; Sch 22, para 1
9.18 This applies only to the following protected characteristics for schools (and
mirrors the provisions in previous equality legislation):
Disability
Religion or belief
Sex
136
Technical guidance for schools in England
Sexual orientation
9.19 A statutory requirement is anything that is required under:
An Act of Parliament
Subordinate legislation of such Acts and measures (such as regulations)
A measure of the General Synod of the Church of England
9.20 For the protected characteristics of disability, religion or belief, and sexual
orientation, a statutory requirement also includes any requirement or
condition imposed pursuant to such an Act or measure by a minister of the
Crown.
Nationality discrimination authorised by statute or the
executive
9.21 The Act provides that:
direct or indirect nationality discrimination, or
indirect discrimination, where the provision, criterion or practice refers to a
place of residence or length of time for which a person has been present or
resident in or outside Britain or an area within it,
is lawful in relation to the schools provisions if it is done to comply with
another law, ministerial arrangement or condition.
Sch 23, para 1
National security
9.22 A school does not breach the Act by doing anything that it is proportionate
to do for the purpose of safeguarding national security. This exception
would apply to schools only in very rare circumstances. To be lawful, the
particular discriminatory act must be justified as proportionate, which
means that the action taken must be appropriate and necessary for national
security.
s192
137
Technical guidance for schools in England
Contacts
This publication and related equality and human rights resources are available
from our website.
For advice, information or guidance on equality, discrimination or human rights
issues, please contact the Equality Advisory and Support Service, a free and
independent service.
Telephone 0808 800 0082
Textphone
0808 800 0084
Hours
09:00 to 20:00 (Monday to Friday)
10:00 to 14:00 (Saturday)
Post
FREEPOST Equality Advisory Support Service FPN4431
Questions and comments regarding this publication may be addressed to:
correspondence@equalityhumanrights.com The Commission welcomes your
feedback
Alternative formats
For information on accessing a Commission publication in an alternative format,
please contact: correspondence@equalityhumanrights.com.
© 2014 Equality and Human Rights Commission
ISBN 978 1 84206 582 2
Updated September 2023
138
