HM Government
The national strategy for
autistic children, young
people and adults: 2021
to 2026
21 July 2021
HM Government
The national strategy for autistic
children, young people and adults:
2021 to 2026
21 July 2021
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
1
Contents
Foreword from the Secretary of State for Health and Social Care
3
In memory of Rt Hon Dame Cheryl Gillan DBE MP
5
Joint Ministerial foreword
6
Chapter 1 : introduction
8
About autism
8
Why a new autism strategy is needed
8
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
9
Approach to this strategy
10
Chapter 2 : our roadmap for the next 5 years
12
How we will make our vision a reality
12
Chapter 3 : improving understanding and acceptance of autism within society
14
Our vision
14
How we will work towards this in 2021/2022
15
Our commitments in the first year
16
Chapter 4 : improving autistic children and young people's access to education, and
supporting positive transitions into adulthood
17
Our vision
17
How we will work towards this in 2021/2022
18
Our commitments in the first year
20
Chapter 5 : supporting more autistic people into employment
21
Our vision
21
How we will work towards this in 2021/2022
22
Our commitments in the first year
23
Chapter 6 : tackling health and care inequalities for autistic people
25
Our vision
25
How we will work towards this in 2021/2022
26
Our commitments in the first year
28
2
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
Chapter 7 : building the right support in the community and supporting people in
inpatient care
30
Our vision
30
How we will work towards this in 2021/2022
31
Our commitments in the first year
34
Chapter 8 : improving support within the criminal and youth justice systems
35
Our vision
35
How we will work towards this in 2021/2022
36
Our commitments in the first year
38
Chapter 9 : enablers for this strategy
39
Improving research, innovation and examples of best practice
39
Improved data collection and reporting to drive system improvement
39
Strengthened governance, leadership and accountability
40
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
3
Foreword from the Secretary of State for
Health and Social Care
As a society, we've come a long way since the landmark 2009
Autism Act. We've never had a greater public awareness of hidden
disabilities like autism. That awareness is increasingly reflected in
how our country is run, from the NHS to local government services.
Although we've come so far over the last decade, there must be no limit to the ambitions of
autistic people; they should have the same opportunities as everyone else in society.
For me, our goal must be nothing less than making sure autistic people from all
backgrounds, ethnicities, genders, sexualities and ages - in all parts of the country - get
the support they need to live full and happy lives.
I'm painfully aware that the pandemic has been a setback in our efforts to reach this goal.
People are having to wait longer for autism assessments and diagnosis, and the
restrictions have been a barrier to access for important services like day centres and
community mental health services, which help keep people well. In addition, we know that
wider pressures on the labour market may make it even harder for autistic people to get
into and stay in work.
I want to underline my thanks to everyone who played their part in helping us keep each
other safe. I understand just how much this disruption has taken its toll on autistic people's
livelihoods and mental health.
We've also learned some valuable lessons from the pandemic, from the benefits of flexible
working to new ways of providing community support online, and the need to improve data
collection about autism so we have a deeper understanding of people's experiences
across health and care services.
4
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
As we move out of the pandemic, I encourage us all to take part in levelling up society. In
particular, I hope that employers across the country, including the public sector, will help
more autistic people get into work and make sure they provide the reasonable adjustments
people need to thrive, making use of the support that is being made available.
I'm determined we build on the experience of the pandemic as we work to build back
better and level up opportunity in this country. This new strategy will help us do that and
much more.
Whether it's delivering world-class education for everyone, reducing diagnosis waiting
times, or supporting autistic people with training and employment, this strategy sets out the
real steps we're going to take over the next five years. These are steps I know will make a
difference and help all autistic people across England lead the full and happy lives they
deserve.
S.Dan. S
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
5
In memory of Rt Hon Dame Cheryl Gillan
DBE MP
This new strategy honours and marks the contribution of Dame
Cheryl Gillan, Chair of the All-Party Parliamentary Group on Autism
(APPGA), and long-standing champion for autistic people and their
families. Dame Cheryl, who died in April 2021, was instrumental in
tackling the inequalities autistic adults face, when, in 2009, she
brought forward the Private Member's Bill on autism. Since its
inception, the Autism Act has made an important difference to many
autistic people and their families' lives.
In addition, Dame Cheryl made significant progress in improving parliamentarians'
understanding of autism by introducing autism understanding training, which over 100 MPs
have undertaken. We have both completed this training and will be encouraging other
Ministers and parliamentarians to do so going forward.
We are deeply grateful for Dame Cheryl's tireless work to improve support and services for
autistic people and their families across the country, in particular for the inquiries she led
as Chair of the APPGA. The findings from the 2017 inquiry into the education system
contributed to our decision to extend the autism strategy for the first time to children and
young people. Furthermore, the 2019 inquiry into the impact of the Autism Act ten years on
from its enactment has been vital in the development of this new strategy. We will all
remember and are deeply grateful for Dame Cheryl's perseverance, drive and
contributions to improving the lives of autistic people and their families across the country.
Hallahs
Mdry Mary ford. ford.
6
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
Joint Ministerial foreword
The introduction of the Autism Act 2009 was ground-breaking because it was the first
disability-specific piece of legislation in England. Over the decade since its inception, it has
resulted in improvements in support for autistic adults across the country, and greater
awareness of autism in society. However, we know that more still needs to be done to
improve autistic people's lives.
Before the Autism Act, autism was often misunderstood by the public and professionals,
and too many autistic people faced significant barriers to living full and rewarding lives in
the community. It was clear that action was needed to improve services and support for
autistic adults and their families, and to improve society's awareness of autism. The first 2
strategies, published in 2010 and 2014, set out actions to this end and, since then, we
have been able to make significant headway in tackling the inequalities people face over
the last ten years.
Working together with the National Health Service (NHS) and Local Authorities at both the
national and local level, we have been able to increase the availability of autism diagnostic
services across the country, with a 2018 survey of Local Authorities on the implementation
of the autism strategy showing that all areas now have these services.
This means that more autistic people can access a diagnosis that is often vital in unlocking
the right services, support and adjustments they need to live a healthy and full life. In
2019, we included autism as one of the priorities in the NHS Long Term Plan, in
recognition of the work that needs to be done to improve autistic people's access to
healthcare. Delivering on the NHS Long Term Plan's commitments will enable autistic
people to live healthier lives.
Moreover, we have been able to transform society's awareness of autism, as an estimated
99.5% of the public have heard of autism according to the National Autistic Society (The
Autism Act, Ten Years On), which is so important in autistic people being able to feel
included as part of their community.
While we have made these important improvements, there is still much more to do to
ensure that autistic people across the country have equal opportunities to the rest of
society, access to the services they need to have good health and wellbeing and to
participate fully in their communities.
In 2021, too many autistic people still face long waits for their diagnosis - and do not
always receive support that is tailored to their needs at an early enough stage. Far too
many autistic people still struggle in childhood, both with getting a diagnosis and with
support following a diagnosis, including at school, and find it hard to get a job when they
reach adulthood.
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
7
Since the last autism strategy was published, new challenges have also emerged for
autistic people, as has our understanding of the barriers people face across their lives. We
have seen the number of people identified as being autistic in inpatient mental health
services increase, and now know more about the scale of the life expectancy gap for
autistic people, which is we know is approximately 16 years compared to the general
population.
In addition, we know the COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on autistic
people and their families' lives. We commissioned research on the impact of the
pandemic, and have also heard concerning findings from autism charities' Left Stranded
report. These reports have shown that the pandemic exacerbated many of the inequalities
autistic people already faced, like loneliness, anxiety and exclusion from public spaces, as
well as creating new challenges like problems with shopping for food and understanding
social distancing measures. The pandemic also risks making it harder for autistic people to
get into work due to wider challenges in the labour market.
We will work in collaboration across government, with autistic people and their families, the
NHS, local government, and the voluntary sector, to implement the strategy, starting with
the actions in our implementation plan for 2021 to 2022.
Over the next 5 years, we want to create a society that truly understands and includes
autistic people in all aspects of life; one in which autistic people of all ages, backgrounds
and across the country have equal opportunities to play a full part in their communities and
to have better access to the services they need throughout their lives. This is our vision to
make life fundamentally better for autistic people, their families and carers by 2026 and we
are determined to make it happen.
Helen Whately MP, Minister of
Vicky Ford MP, Parliamentary
State for Social Care
Under-Secretary of State for
Children and Families
Mdry ford.
8
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
Chapter 1 : introduction
About autism
Autism is a lifelong developmental disability that affects how people perceive,
communicate and interact with others, although it is important to recognise that there are
differing opinions on this and not all autistic people see themselves as disabled. With an
estimated 700,000 autistic adults and children in the UK - approximately 1% of the
population - most people probably know someone who is autistic. In addition, there are an
estimated 3 million family members and carers of autistic people in the UK (National
Autistic Society).
Autistic people see, hear and feel the world differently to other people. Autism varies
widely and is often referred to as a spectrum condition, because of the range of ways it
can impact on people and the different level of support they may need across their lives.
While autism is not a learning disability, around 4 in 10 autistic people have a learning
disability (Autistica).
Some autistic people will need very little or no support in their everyday lives while others
may need high levels of care, such as 24-hour support in residential care. People may
need help with a range of things, from forming friendships, coping at school, managing at
work, or being able to get out and about in the community. In this strategy, we also talk
about neurodiversity, which refers to the different ways the brain can work and interpret
information. It is estimated that around 1 in 10 people across the UK are neurodivergent,
meaning that the brain functions, learns and processes information differently (Embracing
Complexity Coalition, 2019).
Why a new autism strategy is needed
This document is the government's refreshed national strategy for improving the lives of
autistic people and their families and carers in England. It builds on and replaces the
preceding adult autism strategy Think Autism, which was published in April 2014 and
related to adults. It extends the scope of the strategy to children and young people for the
first time, in recognition of the importance of ensuring that they are diagnosed and receive
the right support as early as possible and across their lifetime. The strategy and its
underpinning implementation plan are issued pursuant to the Secretary of State for Health
and Social Care's powers under section 1 of the Autism Act 2009.
The Autism Act (2009), which only applies to adults, was enacted over ten years ago with
the aim of addressing the multiple social disadvantages and health and care inequalities
autistic adults faced. Since then, we have published 2 adult autism strategies, which have
resulted in greater awareness of autism across society and significant improvements in the
priority placed on autism across government.
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
9
This new strategy aligns with the existing statutory guidance on implementing the Autism
Act for Local Authorities and NHS organisations to support implementation of the Adult
Autism Strategy (2015). This sets out Local Authorities' and NHS organisations' duties to
support autistic adults and remains in force, which means that local systems should
continue to deliver on existing requirements, including having active Autism Partnership
Boards in local areas. This guidance will be reviewed in subsequent years of the strategy,
to ensure it aligns with actions we take in implementation plans for years 2 and beyond.
Meanwhile, for children, the Special Educational Needs and Disability (SEND) Code of
Practice (2015), continues to place duties on Local Authorities, NHS organisations and
schools in respect of autistic children and young people.
In 2019, we committed to a review of the existing autism strategy Think Autism to ensure it
is still fit for purpose. We launched a public call for evidence on 14 March 2019, involving
autistic people, their families and carers, professionals and voluntary organisations. This
call for evidence, published alongside this strategy, received 2,700 responses and has
shaped our understanding of the issues autistic people and their families face across their
lives. This, as well as the findings from the APPGA inquiry into the Autism Act, has shaped
the focus and actions we are taking in this strategy. This strategy aligns with wider
government work underway, for example the National Disability Strategy, which will also
impact on autistic people and their families. We will ensure issues relevant to autistic
people are considered as part of these programmes of work.
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
This strategy takes into account the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on autistic people
and their families' lives, as we know this has been very challenging for many. In summer
2020, we commissioned the Policy Innovation and Evaluation Research Unit (London
School of Economics) to undertake rapid research to improve our understanding of autistic
people's experiences during this time, and our ability to respond appropriately. The final
report from this rapid research is published alongside this strategy.
The research showed that the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated challenges many
autistic people already faced, such as loneliness and social isolation, and anxiety. While
reasons for this vary, the research found that many autistic people have struggled with
understanding restrictions and practicing infection control measures. In addition, the
pandemic has created new issues for autistic people, for example in being able to shop at
supermarkets due to new social distancing measures. At the same time, the research also
showed the benefits of lockdowns for some autistic people, who have been better able to
engage in virtual spaces, have felt less societal pressure and have been able to avoid
anxiety-inducing activities like using public transport. This has also provided learning about
what works for autistic people as we move out of the pandemic.
Findings from this research have enabled us to take action to protect autistic children and
young people, adults and their families from being disproportionately affected by the
pandemic across the areas that affect their lives. We have put in place specific exemptions
for autistic people where restrictions have adversely impacted them, for example enabling
people to leave their homes more than once a day and putting in place exemptions on face
covering rules. To prevent autistic people from becoming more lonely and isolated, they
have been able to access support groups during lockdown. In total since the start of the
pandemic, over £34 million of the £750 million VCSE funding package has gone
10
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
specifically towards reducing loneliness. Moreover, we have provided £1.6 million to
charities supporting autistic people and people with a learning disability to enable them to
provide virtual peer support and boost helpline capacity.
In addition, we have taken wider actions that have also supported autistic people during
the COVID-19 pandemic across education, health and social care. Throughout the
pandemic, children and young people who are vulnerable, including anyone with an
Education Health and Care (EHC) plan, have been able to attend school as normal. In
February, we also announced an additional £700 million for schools and providers of 16-19
education to support students during the pandemic. We have also provided over £1.3
billion of specific adult social care sector funding through the Infection Control Fund during
the pandemic, and provided £500 million of funding to support the Mental Health and
Wellbeing Recovery Action Plan in March 2020. This plan includes £31 million specifically
for autistic people and people with a learning disability.
This research, as well as autism charities' Left Stranded report, have informed our focus
for this new strategy, and particularly the actions we are taking in the first year. For
example, the pandemic highlighted gaps in data relating to autistic people and reinforced
the need to improve collection and reporting across health and social care, as well as
other areas. That is why we are committing to develop a cross-government action plan on
improving data in the first year of the strategy.
Approach to this strategy
Based on our understanding of the challenges faced by autistic people and, informed by
their experiences of the COVID-19 pandemic, we are setting out in chapter 2 our vision for
the next 5 years. This depicts the changes we want to make across 6 areas that would
have a significant impact on autistic people's lives, and the approach we are taking
towards delivering on this in 2021 to 2022. We will ensure that progress towards our vision
can be measured and evaluated in each of these areas. The 6 themes are as follows and
form the basis of chapters 3 to 8:
improving understanding and acceptance of autism within society
improving autistic children and young people's access to education, and
supporting positive transitions into adulthood
supporting more autistic people into employment
tackling health and care inequalities for autistic people
building the right support in the community and supporting people in inpatient care
improving support within the criminal and youth justice systems
We are clear that in some areas work will only begin after the first year (2021 to 2022), and
in many there will need to be additional actions in the subsequent years of the strategy to
fully realise our vision. In some areas work is still in early stages or ongoing so we will wait
on findings or further progress before we take action. This includes the National Autistic
Society's research on developing a tailored Improving Access to Psychological Therapies
(IAPT) model and the development of Oliver McGowan Mandatory Training for health and
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
11
care professionals. Once developed, this can be adapted to other public servants,
including the police or housing officers. In other areas like employment, we have work
underway to improve support for autistic people but will monitor the full impact of the
pandemic to ensure we are continuing to take the right actions.
In chapter 9, we set out the enablers we will need to work on in the first year to drive
forward progress on the actions in this strategy. This includes improving autism data
collection and reporting across government, which will be important in determining our
progress towards our vision for 2026. In addition, we are committing to improve research
on the barriers people face and the interventions that work for autistic people. The
implementation plan (Annex A) sets out the actions we will take within the first year of the
strategy. The actions we commit to will lay the foundations for what we aim to achieve over
the course of the next 5 years. We will refresh this plan for subsequent years, in line with
future Spending Review rounds.
To succeed in improving autistic people's and their families' lives we will need to work
collaboratively to implement these actions across national and local government, the NHS,
the education system, the criminal and youth justice systems, and with autistic people and
their families. We will refresh our national governance arrangements to ensure
government, delivery partners and other organisations responsible for implementing
actions set out in the implementation plan are held to account on progress.
12
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
Chapter 2 : our roadmap for the next 5
years
How we will make our vision a reality
Below, we set out our vision for what we want autistic people and their families' lives to be
like in 2026 across 6 priority areas, and the steps we as national and local government,
the NHS and others will take towards this within the first year of our implementation plan
(2021 to 2022). We will refresh this implementation plan for subsequent years of the
strategy, setting out further actions we will take across government, working in partnership
with Local Authorities, the NHS and the voluntary sector, as well as autistic people, to
enable us to move closer towards our vision.
We will set measures of success for each of the priority areas in the strategy to make sure
we can effectively monitor progress in year one and beyond, being clear about what we
expect to achieve by 2026. This is important in knowing and demonstrating that we are
making a difference to autistic people and their families' lives. the end of this strategy, we
want life to be fundamentally better for autistic people, their families and carers. We want
to be able to demonstrate that we have transformed autistic people and their families' lives
by:
Improving understanding and acceptance of autism within society: we will
significantly improve the public's understanding and acceptance of autism, and show that
autistic people feel more included and accepted in their communities. We also want the
public to understand how autism can affect people differently, including the difference in
how autistic women and girls present, and to help change people's behaviour towards
autistic people and their families. We want many more businesses, public sector services
and different parts of the transport system to become more autism-inclusive, so that
autistic people can access these spaces and services, just like everyone else.
Improving autistic children and young people's access to education and supporting
positive transitions into adulthood: we want the Special Educational Needs and
Disability (SEND) system to enable autistic children and young people to access the right
support, within and outside of school. We want schools to provide better support to autistic
children and young people, so they are able to reach their potential, and to show that
fewer autistic children are permanently excluded or suspended from school due to their
behaviour. We will make improvements to the support autistic people get in their
transitions into adulthood, so that more autistic people can live well in their own
communities, find work or higher education or other opportunities. This is important in
preventing more young people from avoidably reaching crisis point or being admitted into
inpatient mental health services.
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
13
Supporting more autistic people into employment: we will make progress on closing
the employment gap for autistic people, ensuring that more people who are able and want
to work can do so and that those who have found a job are less likely to fall out of work.
We want more employers to be confident in hiring and supporting autistic people, and to
improve autistic people's experiences of being in work.
Tackling health and care inequalities for autistic people: we want to reduce the health
and care inequalities that autistic people face throughout their lives, and to show that
autistic people are living healthier and longer lives. In addition, we want to have made
significant progress on improving early identification, reducing diagnosis waiting times and
improving diagnostic pathways for children and adults, so autistic people can access a
timely diagnosis and the support they may need across their lives.
Building the right support in the community and supporting people in inpatient
care: we will achieve the targets set out in the NHS Long Term Plan to reduce the number
of autistic people and people with a learning disability being admitted into inpatient mental
health services. We will do so by improving the treatment of autistic people in mental
health legislation to prevent people from being avoidably admitted to inpatient care and
improving the provision of community mental health and crisis support. We will also
improve the suitability and availability of housing support and social care. In addition, for
people who do need to be in inpatient mental health settings, the quality of care will be
better and more tailored to their individual needs and people will be discharged back into
their communities as soon as they are well enough to leave.
Improving support within the criminal and youth justice systems: we will build a
clearer understanding of how autistic people come into contact with the criminal and youth
justice systems, and the type of support they may need across court, prison and under
probation supervision. We will improve the police and wider criminal and youth justice
system staff's understanding of autism so that autistic people are more able to receive the
right support, adjusted to their needs, as well as ensuring that different parts of the justice
system - from prisons to courts - become more autism-inclusive.
14
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
Chapter 3 : improving understanding and
acceptance of autism within society
Our vision
By 2026, we want to demonstrate that we have significantly improved public
understanding and acceptance of autism, and that autistic people feel more
included in their communities and less lonely and/or isolated. We want the public to
have a better understanding of autism and to have changed their behaviour towards
autistic people and their families.
By the end of the strategy, we want many more organisations, businesses and
public sector services to have become autism-inclusive, so that autistic people can
engage in their communities, just like everyone else. This will mean taking part in
initiatives like Autism Hour, the Autism Friendly Award or taking other steps to
become more autism-aware. In 5 years' time, we want to show that autistic people
feel more able to take part in their communities than they do today, including feeling
more comfortable using public transport.
Since the inception of the Autism Act (2009), awareness of autism has increased
substantially, with the National Autistic Society (NAS) estimating that 99.5% of the public
are now aware of autism. There are many reasons for this, including increasing
representation of autism in public life and the media, as well as the Autism Act itself, as
this raised the profile of autism both locally and at a national level. While this is an
important change, evidence from the APPGA's The Autism Act, 10 Years On report found
that there is still a significant lack of understanding about autism amongst the public,
including what it means to be autistic and the diversity of the autistic community. The
APPG report highlighted that just 24% of autistic adults and 26% of family members think
public understanding has improved since the introduction of the Act.
Over the last few years, we have seen many public sector services and organisations
taking steps to become autism-inclusive, with many becoming autism-accredited or taking
other steps to improve how they support autistic people. However, we know that many
autistic people still feel excluded from public spaces and civil society because these can
be overwhelming, busy or noisy and because staff or the public may react negatively to
autistic people's behaviour or support needs. Even before the COVID-19 pandemic autistic
adults reported higher levels of loneliness than the general public. Evidence from the LSE
research we commissioned into the impact of the pandemic has shown that autistic people
may be at risk of further exclusion, due to the challenges many have faced with social
distancing restrictions and changes to support networks. This has affected their confidence
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
15
with getting out into their communities. The NAS Left Stranded report found that compared
to the general public, autistic people were seven times more likely to be chronically lonely
during June and July 2020.
Transport is a key enabler to autistic people and their families being included in their
communities and being able to find employment, but anecdotal evidence tells us that many
find this inaccessible because of how anxiety-inducing noisy and busy environments can
be. Many autistic people also struggle with unanticipated changes to their journeys,
including cancellations and delays. We need to do more to make transport accessible to
autistic people as this is important in improving inclusion. Doing so is even more important
in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, as many autistic people will feel even more anxious
about getting back on public transport - in particular due to changes to the system put in
place to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
How we will work towards this in 2021/2022
Improving public understanding of autism and inclusion across the public sector
We will develop and test an autism public understanding and acceptance initiative, working
with autistic people, their families and the voluntary sector. We want this initiative to help
the public adapt their behaviour towards autistic people and recognise the diversity of the
autistic community; that every autistic person is different. This includes improving
understanding of the strengths and positives of being autistic, as well as the challenges
people might face in their daily lives and how distressed behaviour can manifest itself. We
will also ensure this covers the diversity of the autistic community, including the
presentation of autism in women and girls, the LGBT community and autistic people from
ethnic minority groups.
As government, we will lead the way in becoming more inclusive to autistic people and will
improve Ministers' and policy makers' understanding of autism. We will do so by
encouraging Ministers across Departments to undertake the APPGA's Understanding
Autism sessions, and increasing recognition and representation of neurodiversity across
government Departments. To raise the profile of neurodiversity including autism, across
the Civil Service we will encourage the establishment of a neurodiversity priority for
Disability and Inclusion Champions within government Departments. These champions,
who are senior civil servants, will increase awareness of neurodiversity and engage with
neurodivergent staff through staff networks to ensure their needs are being considered
and heard.
We will also review cross-Civil Service learning and development to ensure that
neurodiversity is an integral part of courses, to enable managers to recruit and support
neurodivergent employees. Furthermore, the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) continues to work
towards the Autism Friendly Award at the MoJ headquarters, to improve accessibility and
support for autistic visitors and staff. The MoJ will share learning with other government
departments.
Making transport and communities more autism-inclusive
We are taking a number of steps to improve the accessibility of transport for autistic people
as we move out of the COVID-19 pandemic. In July 2018, we published the Inclusive
16
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
Transport Strategy, as part of our ambition to ensure equal access for disabled people,
including autistic people, using the transport system by 2030. As part of this, in December
2020, we launched our disability equality training for transport operators, which is vital in
enabling them to understand the types of adjustments people might need.
In addition, we resumed our 'it's everyone's journey' campaign on the 25 May 2021, which
is aimed at helping the public to be more mindful of passengers, including those who are
autistic, and the challenges they may face when using transport. As we move out of
restrictions, we will support disabled people returning to the transport system by ensuring
that rules around face covering exemptions are well understood, that the decision to carry
an exemptions card is entirely a matter for individuals, and that people should be
supported not to feel uncomfortable or intimidated where they do not wear a face covering,
or are unable to socially distance.
We want to encourage businesses and organisations across the country to take steps to
become more autism friendly as this is important in tackling exclusion, loneliness and
social isolation. In this first year and, as we move out of COVID-19 restrictions, we want to
enable more autistic people to take part in sports, culture and the arts. For example, Sport
England's new strategy, launched in January 2021, is working to enable more people,
including autistic people, to be physically active. They are working to tackle the inequalities
and barriers that exist within sport and physical activity, and to unlock the benefits of being
active for everyone, regardless of background or ability. As part of this effort, Sport
England will be working with key partners to engage more autistic people at all levels and
in all forms of sport and physical activity, including across volunteering and coaching. In
addition, we are ensuring that organisations in arts, heritage and culture increase
participation and take steps to make their environments more accessible, including for
autistic people.
Our commitments in the first year
In the first year, our key commitments will be to:
develop and test an autism public understanding and acceptance initiative,
working with autistic people and their families, and the voluntary sector
continue to promote our disability equality training package for transport operators
resume the 'it's everyone's journey' campaign to create a more inclusive and
supportive public transport environment for disabled people
The full list of actions we are taking in 2021 to 2022 is set out in our implementation plan
(Annex A).
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
17
Chapter 4 : improving autistic children and
young people's access to education, and
supporting positive transitions into
adulthood
Our vision
By 2026, we want the SEND system to enable autistic children and young people to
access the right support, both within and outside of education settings. By the end
of this strategy, we want transitions into adulthood to improve, so that more autistic
young people are able to live well in their communities, find work or higher
education opportunities. We want these improved transitions to result in fewer
mental health crises and admissions into inpatient care.
We want education settings to provide better and more inclusive support to autistic
children and young people so that autistic people are better able to achieve their
potential. We want more teachers and educational staff to understand the specific
needs of their autistic pupils, ensuring that more school placements can be
sustained. We also want to demonstrate that more autistic children have had their
needs identified early on and that they are having positive experiences in education
settings.
A growing number of children and young people are being diagnosed as autistic, with
Special Educational Needs data suggesting that 1.8% of all pupils in England now have an
autism diagnosis. In spite of this, we know that many autistic children and young people
are still having poor experiences within school, are not reaching their potential and are
struggling in the transition to adult life. The APPGA's The Autism Act, 10 Years On report
showed that autistic children and young people often find it difficult to get the help they
need at school due to poor understanding of autism amongst education staff. It also
highlighted that less than 5 in 10 were confident about supporting autistic children and
young people, and this can result in missed opportunities to help children reach their
potential or prevent children's needs or distressed behaviour from escalating.
Many autistic children find school environments overwhelming and evidence from the
APPGA shows they often feel misunderstood or judged by their peers because of their
behaviour, which can impact their ability to engage and succeed in education. In addition,
the research highlighted that autistic children and young people often struggle to get
18
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
support they need through the Special Educational Needs and Disability (SEND) system
more generally, including being able to access support early enough from health and
social care, as well as education. We also know that many autistic young people find
transitions into adulthood difficult because this is a period of heightened uncertainty and
can result in changing access to services and support. Evidence from the APPGA's Autism
and Education in England in 2017 report points to staff often lacking the skills needed to
put in place the right plans and support for autistic young people, which can result in them
missing out on opportunities. In addition, we know that many autistic children may benefit
from support to get into higher education or find employment opportunities as they become
adults but struggle to access this.
How we will work towards this in 2021/2022
Improving educational professionals' understanding of autism and inclusive
cultures within schools
We are taking a number of steps to improve understanding of autism amongst educational
professionals, including providing £600,000 of funding for staff autism training and
professional development in schools and colleges. We will work with our training partners
to develop materials and resources and will consider the issue of identification and support
for autistic girls within this. In addition, we will embed autism as a priority for educational
leadership as this is important in developing autism-inclusive cultures and we will share
good autism practice within education settings, focusing on mainstream schools. This will
encourage the provision of early support for autistic children and young people, setting out
the benefits of this in preventing escalation of needs, sustaining school placements and
ensuring more autistic children and young people can achieve their potential.
We want schools to become more inclusive to those with protected characteristics,
including autistic children and young people, which is why we will launch a new anti-
bullying programme. This will be important in making schools more welcoming and
understanding, improving autistic children's experiences of education as well as their
ability to succeed. We expect this new programme to begin in September 2021. In
recognition of the role that mental health can play in determining children and young
people's experiences in schools, we are also putting in place new Mental Health Support
Teams and training for Designated Senior Mental Health Leads within schools, which will
also benefit autistic pupils who are more likely to experience poor mental health. We are
aiming to start rolling this training out in the next academic year 2021 to 2022.
More broadly, we have worked with experts in SEND and organisations to develop a
qualification for early years staff who want to specialise in SEND. In light of the COVID-19
pandemic we have broadened our funding for the voluntary sector to support parent and
child mental health and wellbeing, to help early years providers identify SEN and catch up
children who may be falling behind, including autistic children.
Improving how the SEND system supports autistic children and young people
We want to improve how the SEND system works for children with SEN, including autistic
children and young people, and their families. This will include putting forward proposals to
improve early identification of children and young people's needs, and making sure that
the health, social care and education systems work together to support children holistically
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
19
before their needs escalate. We will be putting forward proposals to improve the system in
the SEND review, which we will publish as soon as possible.
It is important that autistic children, as well as other children with SEN, get the right school
placement, and some will need special school provision to reach their potential. To this
end, we have committed to opening 37 new special free schools across the country, of
which 24 have provision specifically for autistic children and young people. We will move
forward with plans to open these schools, which are expected to start operating from
September 2022. This will enable more children to get the right school placement closer to
home.
We want the right services to be available for children and young people with SEN and
their families in the community, including those who are autistic. To improve the availability
of these services we will promote guidance on planning and commissioning provision for
autistic children and young people as outlined in chapter 6. We will also improve the
engagement of families and children and young people in planning SEND services and
policies at the local level, as we know this makes a difference in meeting people's needs.
To this end, we are providing a further £8.6 million to facilitate engagement, including
supporting up to 152 Parent Carer Forums, to strengthen the engagement of parents and
young people in the SEND system.
Supporting positive transitions into adulthood
To improve transitions into adulthood, we will continue our work to ensure education staff
have the skills required to support autistic young people during this time. That is why we
are including transitions as a topic within our programme of school and college workforce
training and development on SEND. As part of this work, we are ensuring that preparation
for adulthood is discussed much earlier in young people's school careers to ensure that
they are given appropriate information, advice and guidance.
Some autistic young people need support to get into employment, and we want to ensure
more people can get this. That is why we are strengthening and promoting pathways to
employment, such as Supported Internships, traineeships and apprenticeships. To make
this happen, we are working to support all local areas to develop Supported Employment
Forums bringing together employers, Jobcentres, education providers, Local Authorities,
young people and their parents to discuss employment opportunities for young people with
SEND in their local areas. These forums will focus local skills provision on local
employment needs, publicise opportunities for young people with SEND, including to
employers, and create work placement opportunities for autistic young people.
We also want to build on our success in increasing the representation of disabled people,
including autistic people, in apprenticeships - ensuring that disabled people not only
access apprenticeships, but go on to succeed in their apprenticeship. We will do this by
engaging with employers, providers, apprentices and the disability sector to determine
what works and how best to disseminate this.
Continuing to support autistic children and young people during the COVID-19
pandemic
We will take action to support children with SEND, including autistic children and young
people in schools, as we move out of COVID-19 restrictions over the academic year 2021
20
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
to 2022. So far, we have published a range of guidance to support remote education,
including specific support for children and young people with SEND. We recognise that
some autistic children and young people have benefitted from access to remote learning
which can be personalised and accessed flexibly and we will continue to personalise
support for individuals as we move into recovery. We have also provided a hub of
guidance and resources for families, teachers and other professionals aimed at supporting
autistic children and young people during COVID-19.
Our commitments in the first year
In the first year, our key commitments will be to:
improve understanding of autism amongst educational professionals by continuing
to provide funding for autism training and professional development in schools
and colleges in 2021 to 2022
publish and consult on the SEND review as soon as possible
carry out a new anti-bullying programme in schools, to improve the wellbeing of
children and young people in schools, including those who are autistic
provide a further £8.6 million funding in 2021 to strengthen the participation of
parents and young people - including those who are autistic in the design of
SEND policies and services and ensure that they are able to access high quality
information, advice and support
take action to strengthen and promote pathways to employment, such as
Supported Internships, Traineeships and apprenticeships, and work to support all
local areas to develop Supported Employment Forums
The full list of actions we are taking in 2021 to 2022 is set out in our implementation plan
(Annex A).
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
21
Chapter 5 : supporting more autistic people
into employment
Our vision
By 2026, we want data to show that we have made progress on closing the
employment gap for autistic people, drawing on the Labour Force Survey. We want
more autistic people who can and want to work to do so, and to ensure that those
who have found a job are less likely to fall out of work. We also want to show that
employers have become more confident in hiring and supporting autistic people,
and that autistic people's experience of being in work has improved.
By the end of the strategy, we will have improved the support autistic people can
access to find and stay in work. This includes making sure that existing services
and work programmes are more autism-inclusive and better able to help autistic
people find the right employment opportunity for them. In addition, we will have
improved welfare support for autistic people who are unable to work, so they can
get the support they need to live well in their communities.
Evidence shows that there is currently a significant employment gap for autistic people.
Data published by the Office of National Statistics for the first time in February 2021 shows
that as of December 2020, 22% of autistic people aged 16 to 64 are in employment, in
contrast to 52% of disabled people, and 81% of non-disabled people. The The Autism Act,
Ten Years On report found that there are many factors contributing to the scale of this gap,
including struggling to get a job because of recruitment processes not being autism-
friendly or difficulty accessing the support people might need to get into work or while in
work.
Employer awareness plays a crucial role in addressing many of these issues, both in
enabling them to make the right adjustments to recruitment practices or identifying the
adjustments their employees might need. A YouGov poll by the National Autistic Society in
2019 has shown improvements in employer awareness of autism, as well as confidence in
recruiting autistic people (The Autism Act, 10 Years On, 2019). However, there is still more
to do as 31% of employers surveyed said autistic employees would require too much
support, and many reported needing more advice on how to support people. The COVID-
19 pandemic may also cause further difficulty for autistic people trying to find work, given
the considerable pressures on the labour market as a whole in the short-term. Some
autistic people will have lost their jobs, while others are finding it even more difficult to get
into work due to the increased competition for roles. To prevent the gap from widening
22
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
further due to the pandemic, we will consider autistic people's specific needs as we take
wider actions to protect jobs and put in place support to get people into work.
Some autistic people will require help to get into work, for example from Jobcentres.
However, the The Autism Act, Ten Years On report suggests many struggle to get the right
support because they feel Jobcentre staff do not understand their needs or the adaptations
they need to make to engage with autistic people. Some also feel the environment can be
anxiety-inducing or distressing. Others are not able to work and need support from the
welfare system in order to live healthy and independent lives, but struggle to access this
because they feel health assessors may not understand autistic people's needs, or
because they find the assessments process difficult to engage with.
How we will work towards this in 2021/2022
In the first year of the strategy, we will drive improved employer awareness of autism, so
they better understand the benefits of employing autistic people and are able to make the
adjustments needed to recruit and properly support them. We will also continue to promote
better access to employment support programmes for autistic people and move forward
with our plans to improve the benefits system for disabled people to ensure this better
supports autistic people who are unable to work.
As we move out of COVID-19 restrictions, we will also continue our efforts to make
Jobcentres more autism-inclusive, to ensure autistic people receive the help they need to
move into employment or employment programmes. More broadly, supporting disabled
people, including autistic people, will be a focus of our approach to labour market recovery
as we come out of the COVID-19 pandemic. This is vital in protecting autistic people from
being disproportionately affected and preventing the employment gap from widening
further in a challenging context.
Improving employment support and the welfare system
To improve employer confidence, we will continue to engage with employers through the
Disability Confident Scheme. This provides advice and support to employers, and to
promote the skills, talents and abilities of autistic people, as well as other disabled people.
In recognition of the specific need to improve employer understanding of autism, we are
currently holding webinars focused specifically on supporting autistic people in the
workplace. We will also shortly publish the response to the Health is Everyone's Business
consultation, which looked at ways to support disabled people and people with long term
health conditions at work. This response will discuss employer needs, including
information and advice on health and disability that is easier to find and act upon, with
design work this year to develop an improved support offer for employers.
In addition, we want to ensure that autistic people can get the adaptations or extra support
they need while in work, or to get into work. As government, we will lead the way in
becoming a more autism-inclusive employer by expanding our Autism Exchange
Internship Programme, which is aimed at providing more autistic people with experience of
working in the Civil Service. We will also begin to collect data on the number of autistic
people working in our Departments to understand further improvements we may need to
make to recruit and support autistic people.
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
23
We will continue to promote the Access to Work scheme, which provides a range of
practical and financial support to disabled people, including autistic people. During the
COVID-19 pandemic, this has been extended to ensuring those who are working from
home can access equipment and support they need and will continue in the first year of
this strategy. To enable those who need more intensive support to get into work, we will
continue to ensure that the Intensive Personalised Employment Support Programme
(IPES) is open to autistic people who qualify. IPES provides personalised packages of
employment support for people who are at least a year away from moving into work.
People on the scheme have a dedicated key worker to help them overcome barriers that
may be preventing them from entering work, and participants receive up to 15 months of
flexible pre-employment support.
As COVID-19 restrictions ease, we will be able to continue making our Jobcentre network
more welcoming and supportive to autistic customers. We will continue to upskill staff and
increase the number of Disability Employment Advisors to support our Work Coaches. We
are also looking at ways of adapting physical spaces and ways of working to better support
autistic people. We will be taking this forward through our Health Model Offices, which are
Jobcentres that provide more intensive support to disabled people and test innovative
approaches to disability employment support. In addition, we will continue to promote the
Autism Centre for Research on Employment's (ACRE) free Autism Employment Profiling
Service, which went live in October 2020 and enables Jobcentres to signpost and provide
appropriate support to autistic people without a learning disability.
We also want to ensure that autistic people who are unable to work can access the
benefits and support they might need. The Department for Work and Pensions' (DWP)
forthcoming Health and Disability Support Green Paper will consider how the welfare
system can better meet the needs of disabled people, including autistic people, and how
the DWP can improve the service it provides. Once published, this Green Paper will be
subject to a 12 week consultation.
Including autistic people in plans for restoration and recovery from the COVID-19
pandemic
In September 2020, we published our Plan for Jobs to protect, support and create jobs
during the COVID-19 pandemic. In this plan, we outlined a number of actions that will also
benefit autistic people, including increasing the number of Work Coaches, who provide
help to people who are newly unemployed and making sure that Jobcentres continue to be
open to help customers who really need face-to-face support. We will continue to review
how our provision meets the needs of autistic people as we move out of the COVID-19
pandemic, and tailor our response based on this. In addition, we will continue to ensure
that job programmes are accessible to autistic candidates.
Our commitments in the first year
In the first year, our key commitments will be to:
continue our work to ensure our Jobcentre network is welcoming and supportive
to autistic customers, developing and testing new approaches through our Health
Model Offices.
24
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
continue to ensure that through the Disability Confident Scheme, we promote the
skills and abilities of autistic people, and signpost employers to resources on
supporting autistic people
continue to promote employment support programmes, including Access to Work
and IPES to autistic people who are at least a year away from work
continue to recognise the specific needs of autistic people during the COVID-19
pandemic, and take appropriate action to mitigate a disproportionate impact on
autistic people
The full list of actions we are taking in 2021 to 2022 is set out in our implementation plan
(Annex A).
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
25
Chapter 6 : tackling health and care
inequalities for autistic people
Our vision
By 2026, we will have made headway on reducing the health and care inequalities
autistic people face, and show that autistic people are living healthier lives. This
includes evidencing that we are making progress on improving autistic people's
health outcomes and reducing the gap in life expectancy.
By the end of the strategy, we will have made demonstrable progress on reducing
diagnosis waiting times and improving diagnostic pathways for children, young
people and adults across the country. Autistic people will be able to access a high
quality and timely diagnosis, as well as the support they need following diagnosis.
We will have also made progress on improving early identification of autism, so
more children and young people can get the support they need at an early age.
Receiving a timely autism diagnosis is vital in getting the right support and helping autistic
people and those supporting them to better understand their needs. While many more
adults are receiving a diagnosis than when the first autism strategy was published over ten
years ago (Autism Self-Assessment Exercise), too many people are still waiting longer
than the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommended 13 weeks
between referral and first assessment. Autism Waiting Times statistics, which are still
experimental, indicate that many wait longer than the recommended 13 weeks.
There are several factors contributing to these long waits, including increasing demand on
services due to growing public awareness of autism, which has resulted in increased
referrals and more people on waiting lists. This has been further impacted by the COVID-
19 pandemic, which has resulted in some local systems pausing or delaying assessments.
Furthermore, we know there are often blockages within diagnostic pathways, both due to
the diagnostic models used and pressures on the workforce, which can result in longer
waits. It is widely recognised that children and young people should be identified as
autistic as early on in life as possible, as this is important in ensuring children have the
right support in school and as they transition into adulthood. However, evidence from the
National Autistic Society shows that many, in particular girls, are not diagnosed until
adolescence or adulthood because the signs are not recognised.
Autistica's Happier, Healthier, Longer Lives briefings have identified that autistic people
have poorer physical health outcomes and a lower life expectancy than the general
population. The available evidence indicates that autistic people die on average 16 years
26
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
earlier than the general population (Premature Mortality in Autism Spectrum Disorder, The
British Journal of Psychiatry, 2016). There are many possible reasons for this gap,
including poor professional understanding of autism amongst health and care staff, which
can result in autistic people having signs of illness or their needs overlooked. Without the
right understanding, autistic people can miss out on adjustments needed for them to
engage in medical appointments, which often leads to distressing experiences, avoiding
seeking medical attention or losing out on support.
How we will work towards this in 2021/2022
We will work towards our vision by tackling long diagnosis waiting times for children and
young people, as well as adults. In 2021 to 2022, funding will help regions to begin
innovating and improving the quality of diagnostic pathways and post-diagnostic support.
This will enable us to find ways of addressing backlogs from the pandemic and proactively
identify children and young people who are on waiting lists and are at risk of falling into
crisis. To enable autistic children and young people to get support they need earlier on in
life and prevent needs from escalating, we will fund the significant expansion of a pilot
developed in Bradford. This involves healthcare and education staff working together to
assess children who may be autistic in schools.
To tackle the health and care inequalities autistic people face, we will take actions in the
first year to improve health and care staff understanding of autism. Subject to evaluation,
we will move forward with our commitment to develop Oliver McGowan Mandatory
Training for all health and care staff and will improve commissioners' and social workers'
capability so they develop the right services and provide the support autistic people need.
To improve autistic people's health outcomes, we will also move forward with our NHS
Long Term Plan commitments and develop a better understanding of autistic people's
experiences of healthcare. We will improve professionals' ability to identify autistic people
across the health service so they can make necessary adjustments and develop
programmes intended to improve autistic people's physical health, such as trialling autism
health checks.
Improving early identification and reducing autism diagnosis waiting times
We are investing £13 million to begin reducing diagnosis waiting times for children and
young people, as well as adults, in line with the NHS Long Term Plan and the Mental
Health and Wellbeing Recovery Action Plan. This funding will enable local systems to test
different diagnostic pathways and post-diagnostic pathways, as well as explore ways to
reduce diagnosis waiting times and address backlogs of people waiting for assessments
made worse by the pandemic. The NHS England and Improvement (NHSE/I)-funded
Realist Evaluation of Autism Service Delivery, will also continue to identify autism
diagnostic pathways that work best for children so we can share learning across the
country as part of our evaluation.
We want to prevent children and young people from reaching crisis point while they are
waiting for an autism diagnosis and stop them from being avoidably admitted into inpatient
mental health settings. To help achieve this, we are investing £3.5 million of the £13 million
to enable local systems to begin proactively identifying children and young people on
waiting lists (as well as those on waiting lists for mental health support) who might be at
risk of crisis so they can get the support they need.
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
27
Early identification can play an important role in enabling children and young people to get
timely support, which is crucial in preventing escalation of needs. That is why we are going
to significantly expand a school-based identification programme based on a pilot in
Bradford from 10 to over 100 schools over the next 3 years. This involves health and
education staff working together in schools to assess children suspected to be autistic.
Early findings from the pilot are positive, with children being identified and getting support
earlier. As part of this work, we are monitoring indicators of prevalence of autism in girls as
current assessment and diagnostic approaches identify a higher proportion of boys than
girls as autistic. We want to test whether novel approaches can improve identification and
will include this within our evaluation of the programme.
To monitor our progress on reducing waiting times, we will continue to collect and improve
data on autism diagnosis waiting times and identify areas that are not meeting the NICE-
recommended 13 weeks between referral and assessment (Autism waiting times statistics,
NHS Digital). In addition, we are developing an action plan with NHSE/I and NHS Digital to
enable us to report on diagnostic waiting times for children and young people. Current data
on diagnostic waiting times is based on reporting of diagnoses by mental health
organisations, while community services where children are usually diagnosed are not
reported.
Improving health and care professionals' understanding of autism
Improving health and care staff's understanding of autism is crucial in enabling us to make
progress on reducing health inequalities for autistic people. In 2021 to 2022, we will
continue to trial and develop the Oliver McGowan Mandatory Training in learning disability
and autism for all health and adult social care staff across England. This draws on the
Core Capabilities Framework for Supporting Autistic People, which sets out the essential
capabilities necessary for staff involved in supporting autistic people. The training will
provide staff with knowledge they need to provide reasonable adjustments for autistic
people, which will play an important role in tackling health and care inequalities and
improving autistic people's wellbeing.
Social workers play an important role in identifying the support autistic people need
throughout their lives. That is why, in addition to developing Oliver McGowan Mandatory
Training, we will publish a Capability Statement for social work with autistic children and
their families in line with the existing Capability Statement for Social Work with Autistic
Adults to ensure they have the knowledge required to support people throughout their
lives. We will also introduce new National Assessment and Accreditation System (NAAS)
simulated practice and knowledge assessment materials for social workers working with
autistic children.
Commissioners need the right skills and tools to develop services that work for autistic
people. To improve their capabilities, the Local Government Association (LGA), Skills for
Care and the Association of Directors of Adult Social Services (ADASS) will roll out their
qualification for commissioners who work with autistic people and people with a learning
disability to a further 120 NHS and Local Authority commissioners. In addition, we
commissioned Skills for Care and the National Development Team for Inclusion (NDTi) to
develop guidance to help commissioners identify local demand and develop the right
services for autistic people. This guide is published alongside the strategy.
28
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
To deliver on the commitments set out in the NHS Long Term Plan and the actions in this
strategy, we need autism to be prioritised by leadership in local health systems. To this
end, we are providing £1.25 million to recruit Champions in autism and learning disability
to embed high quality and accessible autism and learning disability services in every
Integrated Care System. We also expect that all Integrated Care Boards, which will be
established by the proposed Health and Care Bill, will focus on autism and learning
disabilities at the highest level, for example by having a named executive lead for autism
and learning disability.
Reducing the health and care inequalities autistic people face
We want to develop a better understanding of the inequalities autistic people face and the
causes for the gap in life expectancy so we can take the right actions to improve people's
health outcomes. To do so, NHSE/I's new Learning from Lives and Deaths - People with a
Learning Disability and Autistic People programme (LeDeR) will, for the first time, include
autistic people. This means that all autistic adults whose deaths are notified to the
programme will be able to have a review.
We know autistic people can experience poor health outcomes because signs of illness
can be overlooked, or because people may delay seeking medical attention until their
needs have escalated. NHSE/I will be trialling a primary care health check for autistic
adults in the North East, developed by a research consortium by Newcastle University and
funded by Autistica. The aim of this will be to identify autistic people's needs earlier and
improve their physical and mental health. To this end, NHSE/I will also resume its pilot of
hearing, sight and dental checks for children in special residential schools.
We know that autistic people often need adjustments to their healthcare for this to meet
their needs, but that currently professionals cannot always identify that people are autistic
or the adjustments they may require. That is why NHSE/I are developing 'digital flags' in
patient records so healthcare professionals across the NHS are aware that someone is
autistic and can tailor the support they provide accordingly. NHSE/I will work with 12 early
adopter sites across regions to test this reasonable adjustment flag this year.
Our commitments in the first year
In the first year, our key commitments will be to:
invest £10.5 million to test and implement the most effective ways to reduce
diagnosis waiting times for children and young people, the impact of the COVID-
19 pandemic on waiting lists, and proactively identify those who are waiting for an
assessment and are at risk of crisis
invest £2.5 million of funding to improve the quality of adult diagnostic and post-
diagnostic pathways, and help to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
on waiting lists
fund an expansion of an early identification pilot programme, which involves
health and education professionals working together in schools to assess children
who may be autistic or have other SEN
move forward with existing Long Term Plan commitments on reducing health
inequalities, including trialling an autism health check, piloting hearing, sight and
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
29
dental checks for children in residential schools and laying the foundation for
improved recording of reasonable adjustments in patient records
continue to trial and develop the Oliver McGowan Mandatory Training on learning
disability and autism for all health and adult social care staff
The full list of actions we are taking in 2021 to 2022 is set out in our implementation plan
(Annex A).
30
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
Chapter 7 : building the right support in the
community and supporting people in
inpatient care
Our vision
We will have achieved the targets we set out in the NHS Long Term Plan for
reductions in the number of autistic people and people with a learning disability
who are mental health inpatients by 2024. We are also seeking to modernise the
Mental Health Act and will bring forward changes which would mean that autistic
people are only admitted to inpatient mental health settings if absolutely necessary.
These changes would mean that autism alone is no longer a lawful basis for
ongoing detention in inpatient care and would enable people in inpatient care to be
discharged as soon as they are well enough to leave.
By the end of the strategy, we will have also delivered significant improvements to
the provision and quality of community support, including social care, mental health
and housing support. This will prevent more autistic people from reaching crisis
point. For autistic people who really need care in inpatient settings, we want to
show this is of high quality, therapeutic and tailored to their needs, and as close to
home as possible.
As we set out in the Building the Right Support national plan in March 2015, all autistic
people should have the opportunity to participate in their communities amongst friends
and family, and live in their own home or with people they choose to live with. We are clear
that people should not be in inpatient mental health settings unless absolutely necessary
for clinical reasons, and set out our target of a 50% reduction in the number of autistic
people and people with a learning disability in these settings by 2023/2024 (compared with
March 2015 levels) in the NHS Long Term Plan. Since 2015, we have made progress
towards this target, as we have achieved a net decrease in inpatient numbers of 28% as of
June 2021 (Assuring Transformation data).
When compared to the decrease in overall inpatient numbers, the data shows that the
decrease for people with an autism diagnosis has not been at the same rate. As of the end
of June 2021, there are still 1,200 people with an autism diagnosis in these settings
(Assuring Transformation, July 2021). There are several reasons for this, including better
identification and diagnosis of autism when people are admitted into inpatient care. While
we are making progress in discharging people, too many autistic people (particularly
adolescents and young adults) are still being admitted into these settings. This is because
they often struggle to access community support, including social care, mental health and
housing support before their needs escalate. This is not always available at the right time
or tailored to their needs. The law also currently allows clinicians to admit autistic people to
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
31
inpatient care without them having a clear mental health need, which can result in
inappropriate admissions.
For autistic people in inpatient care, we know more needs to be done to improve the
quality of support. Many reports have highlighted concerns about poor care and risks of
abuse in inpatient care, which we are clear is totally unacceptable. These reports have
also set out that for autistic people, inpatient environments can contribute to additional
distress and worsening mental health. Inpatient care staff often do not understand autistic
people's needs and misinterpret their behaviour, which can lead to use of restraint,
seclusion or segregation. The environments themselves can also cause sensory distress
as they can be chaotic, noisy and unfamiliar to people.
How we will work towards this in 2021/2022
We will drive reductions in the number of autistic people and people with a learning
disability in inpatient settings through our Delivery Board for Building the Right Support,
which is chaired by the Minister of State for Social Care. The Board brings together
representatives from government Departments, NHSE/I, local government and other
organisations responsible for delivering on Building the Right Support. The Board,
alongside an Advisory Group of people with lived experience, is addressing challenges in
making further progress on reducing the number of people in inpatient care including;
improving community support and crisis prevention, access to housing and preventing
admissions during the transition to adulthood.
We want to prevent autistic people from being avoidably admitted to inpatient care, which
is why we are seeking to make legislative changes through the Mental Health Act White
Paper. Specifically, we are proposing to change the detention criteria so autistic people
can only be admitted if there is a probable mental health need.
As part of the NHS Long Term Plan, we are investing over £40 million in 2021 to 2022 to
prevent avoidable admissions and improve community support. This includes £25 million
to improve the capacity and capability of 7-day specialist multidisciplinary and crisis
support for autistic people and people with a learning disability in every area of the
country. In addition, we are providing £15 million of funding to put in place keyworkers for
children and young people with complex needs in inpatient mental health settings, as well
as those at risk of being admitted to these settings. We will also improve autistic people's
access to housing and social care that meets their needs, by increasing the provision of
supported housing, enabling more people to access adaptations to their homes and
reforming the social care system so it is fit for purpose.
To speed up discharges, we also established the £62 million Community Discharge Grant
to tackle the financial barriers and disincentives to discharging people from inpatient care.
This grant provides extra funding to Local Authorities to accelerate discharges and will
provide this funding to nominated lead Local Authorities in England for the second of 3
years (£21 million). In addition, we are investing funding as part of the wider £31 million
from the COVID-19 Mental Health and Wellbeing Recovery Action Plan to address the
additional pressure caused by the pandemic on community and mental health services
supporting autistic people and people with a learning disability. It will help to prevent
avoidable admissions by increasing respite support and providing help for autistic children
and young people in schools to prevent suspensions or permanent exclusions. This
32
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
funding will also enable us to drive improvements to inpatient care provision for autistic
people through autism training for staff and funding to adapt environments. More broadly,
we will move forward with a number of actions to improve the quality of inpatient care,
including reducing the use of restraint, seclusion and segregation.
Improving crisis prevention and avoidable admissions into inpatient settings
As part of the COVID-19 Mental Health and Wellbeing Recovery Action Plan funding, we
are investing in a number of actions to prevent crisis and avoidable admissions of children
and young people. To alleviate the pressures many families and autistic children and
young people with and without a learning disability have experienced, we are providing £3
million for respite and short breaks after COVID-19. In addition, we will invest £4 million in
2021 to 2022 to roll out the Transforming Care for Children and Young People accelerator
programme. The latter involves NHS local systems, Local Authorities, parent carer forums
and the voluntary sector working together to put in place appropriate support to reduce the
number of children being permanently excluded from school.
The Mental Health Act White Paper consultation made a number of proposals to improve
the availability of community support and prevent avoidable admissions. This includes new
legal duties on NHS local systems and Local Authorities to ensure an adequate supply of
community services. To enable local areas to better plan for services and prevent
avoidable admissions, it also proposed a duty on local areas to monitor the risk of crisis for
autistic people and people with a learning disability. Furthermore, to ensure autistic people
are only admitted if there is a therapeutic need, we proposed that an autism diagnosis
should not itself be grounds for detention under the Act, and that mental illness should be
the reason for any inpatient admission. We will issue our response to this in summer 2021.
To ensure autistic people, as well as disabled and older people, have better access to
supported housing, we have committed that 10% of the homes built via the £11.5 billion
new Affordable Homes Programme will be supported housing by 2026. Many autistic
people can live well in their own homes if these are adapted to their needs, for example by
having their walls sound-proofed to prevent sensory distress. The Disabled Facilities Grant
(DFG) is provided by councils to meet the costs of such adaptations. However, we
anecdotally know that Local Authorities are not always aware of how adaptations can
support autistic people, and that many autistic people do not know of the grant's existence.
That is why we will work with the National Body for Home Improvement Agencies to offer
support to Local Authority DFG teams and will reach out to autism charities to raise autistic
people's awareness of how the DFG can support autistic people.
We are committed to sustainable improvement of the adult social care system and will
bring forward proposals in 2021. The objectives for reform are to enable an affordable,
high quality adult social care system that meets people's needs, while supporting health
and care to join up services around them. We want to ensure that everyone, including
autistic people, receive the care they need to enable them to live full and independent
lives.
On 15 January 2021, we also launched the Independent Review of Children's care. The
Independent Review of Children's Social Care is a manifesto commitment and a part of the
Government's commitment to levelling up across the country. The review will take a
fundamental look at what is needed to make a real difference to children who need social
care.
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
33
In addition, to prevent more autistic people from being avoidably admitted to inpatient care,
we need a better understanding of the types of community support that meet autistic
people's needs before and during crisis. That is why, as part of the Building the Right
Support Delivery Board, our Advisory Group of people with lived experience, the LGA and
ADASS are leading work to review best practice models of community-based support for
autistic people, people with a learning disability or both. The LGA and an NDTi-led
partnership will also continue to roll out their Small Supports programme to an additional 8
Transforming Care Partnerships across the country. This programme involves working
with and encouraging the establishment of small providers that promote people's individual
choice and control in the community.
Improving the quality of inpatient care for autistic people and facilitating timely
discharges from inpatient care
Ensuring that people can make their voices heard and that they and their families can
speak up where there are concerns about care is crucial in improving people's
experiences. Advocates can play a crucial role in making sure people's views are listened
to, and that issues are addressed. This is why we are committing £4.5 million to undertake
a joint DHSC and NHSE/I review of advocacy to ensure it is fit for purpose and will make
recommendations based on this by 2022. Families and carers should be able to speak up
about their loved ones' experiences, and we agree with the Joint Committee on Human
Rights' report on the Detention of Young People with Learning Disabilities and/or Autism
that injunctions, which are court orders to prevent people from speaking up about their
care, should not be used to this end. To prevent this from happening, we will commission
guidance on the use of injunctions by May 2022 and require health and care bodies to
inform the Secretary of state if they apply for an injunction.
We are also taking actions specifically aimed at improving the quality of inpatient care for
autistic people who often find these settings distressing. Improving staff understanding of
autism can play an important role in enabling staff to provide autistic people with adjusted
support and/or responding to distress. To improve how these services support autistic
people, we are investing £1.5 million of funding to develop training for staff working in adult
inpatient mental health settings, in line with tier 3 of the Core Capabilities Framework for
supporting autistic people. We know inpatient environments themselves can be
overwhelming to autistic people, which is why we are also providing £4 million to enable
inpatient settings to become more autism-friendly.
In addition to improving the quality of inpatient care, we are working to facilitate timely
discharges for autistic people. Care and Treatment Reviews (CTRs) and Care, Education
and Treatment Reviews (CETRs) can play an important role in supporting people towards
discharge, but are not always taking place or being properly acted upon. That is why, in
the Mental Health Act White Paper, we proposed to put these on a statutory footing and to
require that clinical teams justify why they have not acted on these reviews.
Addressing the use of restrictive practice
In 2018, the Secretary of State for Health and Social Care commissioned the Care Quality
Commission (CQC) to undertake a review into the use of restrictive practices. In response
to recommendations made in the CQC's Interim report: review of restraint, seclusion and
segregation, we committed to review cases of all autistic people and people with a learning
disability in inpatient care, and undertake independent case reviews for people in long-
34
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
term segregation to ensure people are getting the right care and being supported towards
discharge in the community. An Oversight Panel chaired by Baroness Sheila Hollins was
established to examine findings from these reviews and develop recommendations to
government, NHSE/I and care organisations about improving support for those in long-
term segregation, which is being published on the same day as this strategy. The CQC's
final report, Out of Sight - who cares?, published on 22 October 2020, made
recommendations to improve the quality of inpatient care and reduce the use of restrictive
practices. Our response to this report is also published today.
We are clear that restrictive practices should only ever be used as a last resort, when all
attempts to de-escalate a situation have been tried. In November 2018, we passed the
Mental Health Units (Use of Force) Act, also known as Seni's Law, to increase oversight
and management over the use of force in mental health settings. We published the draft
statutory guidance on the implementation of the Act for consultation in Spring 2021 and
will set out a full timetable for commencing the Act at the earliest opportunity.
As part of our effort to reduce the use of restrictive practices and facilitate discharge for
autistic people and people with a learning disability with long stays in inpatient mental
health settings, we are working with NHSE/I to develop a Senior Intervenor pilot. This will
involve Senior Intervenors working with people in inpatient settings, supporting and
overseeing actions from Independent Care (and Education) Treatment Reviews and
helping those in long-term segregation towards discharge. We have agreed to support the
implementation of this pilot as part of a wider package of £1.35 million to implement
dynamic life planning and support for people experiencing long-term segregation and
seclusion.
Our commitments in the first year
In the first year, our key commitments will be to:
provide £25 million of funding to improve the capacity and capability of 7-day
specialist multidisciplinary learning disability services and crisis support for each
local area, and £15 million of funding to put in place keyworkers for children and
young people with complex needs, including those who are autistic
provide £18.35 million to prevent crises and avoidable admissions into inpatient
care, improve the quality of care for autistic people in inpatient mental health
services and facilitate discharges back into the community
review the results of our proposals to improve the treatment of autistic people
under the Mental Health Act and issue our response in summer 2021
provide £21 million funding to Local Authorities through the Community Discharge
Grant, to accelerate discharges
The full list of actions we are taking in 2021 to 2022 is set out in our implementation plan
(Annex A).
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
35
Chapter 8 : improving support within the
criminal and youth justice systems
Our vision
By 2026, we want to have made improvements in autistic people's experiences of
coming into contact with the criminal and youth justice systems, by ensuring that
all staff understand autism and how to support autistic people. We want all parts of
the criminal and youth justice systems, from the police to prisons, to have made
demonstrable progress in ensuring that autistic people have equal access to care
and support where needed. In addition, we want autistic people who have been
convicted of a crime to be able to get the additional support they may require to
engage fully in their sentence and rehabilitation.
Available evidence indicates that autistic people may be over-represented as people who
come into contact with the criminal and youth justice systems, as victims, witnesses or
defendants. However, we know from the APPGA inquiry that they often have poor
experiences when they come into contact with these systems. There are many reasons for
this, including poor understanding of autism amongst professionals as well as challenges
with getting adjustments they need to engage in processes. This lack of understanding can
cause staff to misinterpret autistic people's behaviour, resulting in missed opportunities to
divert them from the criminal and youth justice systems. Research from the Equality and
Human Rights Commission also found that disabled people, including autistic people,
often struggle to participate and engage in areas like sentencing. This is because
adjustments are not made to these processes, or because their needs are not identified
early enough.
Evidence from the APPGA inquiry highlighted that autistic people often find prison
environments overwhelming because they can be noisy, brightly lit and cause sensory
distress. The inquiry found that prison staff do not always understand people's needs or
miss those who may be undiagnosed. In addition, autistic people who are in contact with
the criminal justice system often struggle to access support or the health and social care
services they may need. This includes difficulties accessing the care and support they may
require on leaving custody, which can make transitions back into the community more
challenging.
36
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
How we will work towards this in 2021/2022
In the first year of the strategy, we will develop a better view of existing provision for
neurodivergent adults, including autistic adults, through our call for evidence on
neurodiversity in the criminal justice system. This is being led by HM Inspectorates of
Prisons and Probation, with support from HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire &
Rescue Services and will provide us with a better understanding of the improvements we
need to make.
We will take a number of steps this year to improve staff awareness and understanding of
autism across the criminal and youth justice systems, including prison and probation staff,
and youth custodial specialists. We will undertake work to improve autistic people's access
to adjustments and support and help make environments like prisons and probation
services more autism friendly. We will also drive better access to health and social care
services for those in contact with the criminal and youth justice systems, including the
support they may need as they leave custody.
Improving understanding of autism across the criminal and youth justice systems
We know that frontline criminal and youth justice staff's understanding of autism and wider
neurodiversity issues needs to improve. Based on findings from the Neurodiversity call for
evidence, we will develop a training toolkit for frontline staff on neurodiversity and the
additional support people might need. We will also take steps to specifically upskill staff
across the criminal and youth justice systems on autism, including prison staff, to help
ensure autistic people receive the additional or adjusted support they may need. To this
end, we will introduce an autism-specific session as part of the new prison staff 'Custody
and Detention' apprenticeship, which will be undertaken by all new prison officers, in
England and Wales. We will also consider autistic prisoners' needs in the development of
improved safety training for prison staff, which will cover issues such as support for
prisoners identified at risk of self-harm or violence. This will ensure staff have the skills and
knowledge they need to support good safety outcomes.
In addition, Her Majesty's Prison and Probation Service (HMPPS) is developing a revised
Policy Framework and guidance for 'Advancing Diversity and Inclusion for offenders and
children in custody', which will include addressing the needs of autistic children and adults.
This framework and guidance will be published by the end of 2021. Probation services and
staff also need to understand autistic people's needs, which is why we will also continue to
promote the National Probation Service's resources in addition to the Youth Custody
Service's Effective Practice Briefing on 'Supporting Children with Autism Spectrum
Conditions'.
To improve support for neurodivergent people in prison we are also introducing and testing
a new Neurodiversity Support Manager role in a number of prisons, who will be
responsible for developing a neurodiversity strategy for the prison, liaising with education
and skills teams and ensuring that departments across the prison are aware of prisoners'
individual needs. Prison Governors are also expected to commission education providers
to screen a percentage of sentenced prisoners for learning disabilities or learning
difficulties, and autism, on reception in prison. As well as improving prison staff's skills and
capability in supporting autistic prisoners, we need to have a better knowledge of how
many prisoners are autistic, as this will enable prisons to put in place the right support for
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
37
people. To this end, we will explore ways of implementing a new data categorisation list on
disability, which will include autism, as part of HMPPS digital prison management system.
We also want to ensure police officers understand autistic people's specific needs - for
example around communication and sensory needs - and the reasonable adjustments
they might need to make to standard police practices, as this is crucial in ensuring autistic
people are treated fairly and are appropriately diverted away from the criminal and youth
justice systems where possible and appropriate. That is why we will ensure the College of
Policing's Mental Health Authorised Practice is kept updated to reflect current advice and
guidelines on supporting autistic people.
Improving access to services for autistic people in touch with the criminal and
youth justice systems
To improve autistic people's experience of interacting with the criminal and youth justice
systems, regardless of the reason, we need to ensure they are able to access adjustments
and the support they need, and tools available to enable them to engage in processes. For
those in prison, we want to make improvements to these environments so they are more
autism-inclusive. To do so, we will encourage more prisons and probation areas to
undertake the National Autistic Society's Autism Accreditation scheme, which involves
organisations reviewing all aspects of their services and ensuring they are providing good
quality support to autistic people. To date, 3 prisons across the youth and adult estate and
the first ever probation area have been awarded this accreditation, and others are
currently working towards this.
We want autistic people to be able to access support throughout the criminal and youth
justice systems, including in court, as this is vital in enabling autistic people to have equal
access to justice. We are taking a number of actions to this end, including reviewing
intermediary provision, as we know they can play an important role in helping autistic
people with communication, including in giving evidence to the courts and participating in
proceedings. This review will make recommendations about the future of intermediaries,
including considering the use of intermediaries for defendants. In addition, Her Majesty's
Courts and Tribunals Service (HMCTS) will also continue its national programme to
increase training and awareness for staff on reasonable adjustments, and hold events
focused on accessibility and inclusion - which covers autism. HMCTS has also reviewed
its tools and processes supporting the delivery of services for disabled court and tribunal
users, which includes reviewing the approach to supporting autistic people.
We want to explore how we can find alternatives to prosecution and custody for autistic
adults and those with other vulnerabilities. That is why we are funding research over 3
years (starting in 2021) about the use of Out of Court Disposals. The findings from this
research will enable us to review policy and practice for joint work between the police,
NHS and other services, as well as produce practical advice for frontline teams and
service providers. Community Sentence Treatment Requirements (CSTRs), which are
partnership programmes between NHSE/I, the MoJ, DHSC, Public Health England and
HMPPS, and can be used as an alternative short custodial sentence in prison. To help
ensure that treatment programmes available in CSTR sites are accessible to
neurodivergent people, including any adaptations required for autistic people, the
programme will employ a national neurodiversity advisor.
38
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
We are clear that autistic people who come into contact with the criminal justice system
should have equal access to healthcare and social care. Health and justice partners will
continue to work together to improve access to assessments and referrals for support for
autistic people in contact with the criminal and youth justice systems, and ensure all
NHSE/I-commissioned services are able to identify, assess and meet the needs of autistic
people. Healthcare services within the adult prison estate have an important role to play in
meeting the healthcare needs of autistic prisoners, and helping to identify people who may
be autistic, which is why NHSE/I will publish guidance on this in June 2021. Services will
also be supported to develop their own prison autism pathway and, as per the 2020 prison
health primary care service specification, prison healthcare services should also consider
nominating an autism and learning disability Champion.
NHSE/I are rolling out a new service called RECONNECT over the next 3 years, to provide
care after custody for people leaving prison who have ongoing health vulnerabilities,
including autistic people. The service starts working with people, including those who are
autistic, before they leave prison and helps them to make the move to community-based
health and care services that will provide the support that they need.
Some autistic people receive care in secure mental health inpatient settings for offending
behaviour. In line with the Building the Right Support national plan's aims, different models
of support for a safe, effective and timely transition back into the community have been
implemented across the country. Some examples are NHSE/I Forensic Outreach and
Liaison Service (FOLS), which provides specialist, forensic mental health care for autistic
people who have been admitted to secure inpatient care. FOLS ensure that autistic people
who require continued specialist support to address risk, psychological or social care
needs, are offered support so they can be discharged from secure care into the
community.
Our commitments in the first year
In the first year, our key commitments will be to:
review the call for evidence on neurodiversity in the criminal justice system, and
begin the development of a toolkit to educate frontline staff about neurodiversity,
and the additional support people might need
introduce the new Custody and Detention apprenticeship, which includes a
dedicated autism session, to be undertaken by all new prison officers and youth
custodial specialists in England and Wales
conduct research as part of a 3-year programme which will provide insight about
how police use Out of Court Disposal to support adults with vulnerabilities
continue to work together to improve access to assessments and referrals for
support for autistic people in contact with the criminal and youth justice systems,
and to ensure all NHSE/I-commissioned services are able to identify, assess and
meet the needs of autistic people using these services
The full list of actions we are taking in 2021 to 2022 is set out in our implementation plan
(Annex A).
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
39
Chapter 9 : enablers for this strategy
In year one of this strategy, we will focus on putting in place the enablers required
to deliver on the strategy and demonstrate that we are making progress on actions,
which are as follows; (1) improving autism research, innovation and examples of
best practice, (2) improving data collection and reporting to monitor implementation
of the strategy and drive system improvement and (3) strengthening governance,
leadership and accountability.
Improving research, innovation and examples of best practice
While autism research has developed over the last 6 years, there are still notable evidence
gaps related to autism policy and practice, and the provision of services for autistic people.
The research charity Autistica has reported on research investment and research priorities
in the UK. It has found that the balance of research investment has been on the basic
science underlying physiological mechanisms of autism, and that there has been a relative
lack of research on producing evidence on the best ways to meet autistic people's needs,
for example in understanding adult social care services that work for autistic people.
Services informed by high-quality evidence have the potential to allow us to make faster
progress in tackling the inequalities autistic people face, for example the gap in life
expectancy, preventing avoidable inpatient admissions, and improving employment
opportunities. This balance may be starting to shift, as we are seeing a growth in the
number of autism studies funded by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), a
main funder of service and intervention-related research. However, we want to go further
in improving autism research across the areas that affect autistic people's lives. That is
why, in the first year of the strategy we will draw together a research action plan to identify
research priorities for the next 5 years, working together with the research sector, NHSE/I,
autistic people and their families as well as the voluntary sector.
Improved data collection and reporting to drive system improvement
Over the next 5 years, we want to improve the collection and quality of data on autism
used across public services to better support the needs of autistic people and their
families. Autistic people interact with a range of mainstream and specialist services across
systems, such as health and social care, education and employment, and there are still
gaps in data across these areas. There have been significant improvements in autism
reporting in recent years, including the introduction of autism diagnosis waiting times data
collection, improved recording of autism in information about inpatient admissions
(Assuring Transformation) and collection of data about the number of autistic people in
employment.
40
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
Gaps in autism-related data have been highlighted during the COVID-19 pandemic, which
is why we commissioned the London School of Economics to undertake rapid research to
understand the impact of the pandemic on autistic people. While useful information about
autism can be sourced from the bi-annual Self-Assessment Framework (SAF), the data
collected is not mandatory or always comparable, which limits its utility in monitoring the
implementation of the statutory guidance underpinning the autism strategy.
Over the course of the strategy, our vision is for reliance on self-assessments to decrease
as we move towards a cross-government approach to autism data collection and reporting.
In year one of the strategy, we will work across government on the development of an
action plan for data collection and reporting, involving autistic people and their families,
delivery partners and charities. This will build on previous work done for implementation of
the preceding Think Autism strategy, existing work being taken forward by delivery
partners to improve data and will consider requirements across systems. We will ensure
the data collection and reporting mechanisms we develop align with the statutory
guidance, as well as the aims of this new strategy, to measure against progress
effectively.
Strengthened governance, leadership and accountability
To ensure the actions set out in our implementation plans are delivered and make a real
difference to people's lives, we will refresh our governance structure for this strategy and
develop specific measures of success for each of the actions we are committing to as part
of this. The Department for Health and Social Care, in partnership with the Department for
Education, will establish a refreshed national Executive Group to monitor the delivery of
the actions set out in the implementation plan, and hold action owners to account on
progress. The new group will build on the existing Autism Strategy Executive Group, but
will cover all ages, and will continue to include self-advocates, families and carers. We will
work with self-advocates, as well as existing members to develop this new group.
The new Executive Group will report directly into the Minister for Children and Families
and the Minister of State for Care. There will be bi-annual accountability meetings, chaired
by both Ministers to review progress on actions set out in this and subsequent
implementation plans, and we will set up Task and Finish groups to oversee and drive
progress on the actions set out in these plans. These groups will feed into the Executive
Group. We will ensure autistic people, including children and young people, from diverse
backgrounds and with a range of needs, are involved in these. The refreshed governance
structure for this new strategy will align with other work being taken forward by
government, for example the new Building the Right Support governance structure.
At the local level, our expectation is that Local Authorities and the NHS must work in
collaboration with each other and relevant local partners to take forward the key priorities
in this strategy. This should be done in accordance with their legal duties to identify and
support autistic adults, children and young people as stipulated in the following legislation
and underpinning statutory guidance; the Autism Act 2009, the Care Act 2014, the Children
and Families Act 2014, the Children Act 1989 and the Equality Act 2010.
The national strategy for autistic children, young people and adults: 2021 to 2026
41
OGL
© Crown copyright 2021
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3
This publication is also available on our website at www.gov.uk/government/publications
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at autismteam@dhsc.gov.uk.
