The Neurodivergence
Task and Finish Group:
report
Recommendations for mainstream
education
February 2026
Contents
Abbreviated summary
5
Priority One: Timely identification of strengths and needs
5
Priority Two: Workforce development
5
Priority Three: Learning environments, curriculum and assessment
6
Priority Four: Funding, accountability, and commissioning
6
Executive summary
7
Background
7
Introduction
7
Priority One: Timely identification of strengths and needs
8
Recommendation One: Provide educational professionals with evidence-based valid
and accurate holistic educational assessment, along with effective support tools
8
Recommendation Two: Introduce a 'commitment to listen' to parents/carers and
neurodivergent young people and recognise where schools do this well
9
Recommendation Three: Develop clear partnerships for supporting neurodivergent
needs between education, health, and social care
9
Priority Two: Workforce Development
9
Recommendation Four: Provide high quality professional development on strengths,
needs, and support strategies for neurodivergent children and young people
9
Priority Three: Learning environments, curriculum and assessment
10
Recommendation Five: Allow more flexible forms of assessment and curriculum
10
Recommendation Six: Adapt learning environments and ensure behaviour policies are
rooted in an inclusive school culture that values understanding, acceptance and
curiosity
10
Priority Four: Funding, Accountability and Commissioning
11
Recommendation Seven: Develop a model to support strategic commissioning and
planning for local authorities and health bodies
11
Recommendation Eight: Increase funding levels to schools to reflect the level of need
within their population so they can support more neurodivergent children and young
people within their core offer
11
Recommendation Nine: Develop clear and effective local routes to resolution when
challenges occur
12
Full Report
13
2
Background
13
Introduction
13
The key priorities for enacting culture and systems change
16
Priority One: Timely identification of strengths and needs
17
Recommendation One: Provide educational professionals with evidence based valid
and accurate holistic educational assessment, along with effective support tools
17
Why recommendation one is important
17
Practical steps to implement recommendation one
18
Recommendation Two: Introduce a 'commitment to listen' to parents/carers and
neurodivergent young people and recognise where settings do this well
19
Why recommendation two is important
19
Practical steps to implement recommendation two
20
Recommendation Three: Develop clear partnerships for supporting neurodivergent
needs between education, health, and social care
20
Why recommendation three is important
20
Practical steps to implement recommendation three
21
Priority Two: Workforce Development
22
Recommendation Four: Provide high quality professional development on strengths,
needs, and support strategies for neurodivergent children and young people
22
Why recommendation four is important
22
Practical steps to implement recommendation four
22
Priority Three: Learning environments, curriculum and assessment
24
Recommendation Five: Allow more flexible forms of assessment and curriculum
24
Why recommendation five is important
25
Practical steps to implement recommendation five
25
Recommendation Six: Adapt learning environments and ensure behaviour policies are
rooted in an inclusive school culture that values understanding, acceptance and
curiosity
26
Why recommendation six is important
27
Practical steps to implement recommendation six
28
Priority Four: Funding, accountability and commissioning
29
Recommendation Seven: Develop a model to support strategic commissioning and
planning for local authorities and health bodies
29
3
Why recommendation seven is important
30
Practical steps to implement recommendation seven
30
Recommendation Eight: Increase funding levels to schools to reflect the level of need
within their population so they can support more neurodivergent children and young
people within their core offer
31
Why recommendation eight is important
31
Practical steps to implement recommendation eight
32
Recommendation Nine: Develop clear and effective local routes to resolution when
challenges occur
32
Why recommendation nine is important
33
Practical steps to implement recommendation nine
33
Annex A - Terms of Reference
34
Background
34
Purpose
34
How the group will work
34
Timings
34
Membership
35
Acknowledgements
35
Annex B - Methodology
36
Report development process
36
Identifying Barriers and Enablers
36
Delphi process
36
Annex C - Engagement with the sector
37
Parents, Carers and those with lived experience
37
Neurodivergent Children, Young People and Adults
37
Education Staff
37
Charities and networks
38
Academics and sector leads
38
DfE and across-government
39
Other groups - local and national, including health providers
39
Annex D - Terminology used in this report
40
References
42
4
Abbreviated summary
Neurodivergent children and young people are at greatly increased risk of poorer education
and health outcomes than their peers [1-3]. They are more likely to be suspended or absent
from school, out of work, need mental health services, have poor long-term health, or end
up in the criminal justice system [1-3]. These poor outcomes can be downstream
consequences of barriers that make it hard for some neurodivergent learners to access, and
benefit from, our education system [23]. This inequity of access is compounded by structural
inequalities associated with ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic position [5].
Equity will not be achieved by simply pasting a set of new initiatives on top of the existing,
under-resourced system [6]. Nor will it be achieved by creating multiple parallel pathways,
each for a different group of children. Instead, mainstream settings should become more
inclusive as standard. To achieve this, as set out in our recommendations, we need both
a cultural and systems shift - we cannot effectively change one without a transformation
of the other.
What success will look like
The litmus test for success will not be measured in specific accommodations -
important though these may be - but by whether neurodivergent children
fundamentally feel that they belong and are wanted in school, and that they are
supported to achieve, attain and prepare for adulthood.
Our report identifies four key priorities for action by government with the involvement,
commitment, and support of all our organisations and communities:
Priority One: Timely identification of strengths and needs
Support must be independent - and perceived to be independent - from any clinical
diagnostic process. Mainstream education settings - including Early Years settings,
schools, and colleges - should be provided with free, reliable, evidence-based, validated,
scalable, developmentally appropriate, and comprehensive assessment tools, enabling
these settings to identify educational needs, and foster strengths, as early as possible and
throughout a child's development [7, 8]. This is not about screening for specific conditions,
but about offering effective support as quickly as possible: assessment tools must therefore
be easily interpreted, implemented, and map onto deliverable education plans.
Our recommendations involve dialogue and information sharing between health, education
and social-care systems, and incorporate a role for parents and neurodivergent young
people in assessment and subsequent planning processes [6].
Priority Two: Workforce development
Senior leaders, teachers, and support staff need the time and resources to build their
knowledge and understanding of neurodivergence. This requires a workforce strategy,
including minimum standards within the Initial Teacher Training and Early Career
Framework (ITTECF) and post-qualification professional development with NPQs for Head
5
Teachers, experienced teachers, and support staff. This training and quality recognition
must move beyond partial coverage of a handful of clinical conditions and instead focus on
the best evidence around common barriers to learning and participation that teachers will
encounter, regardless of any formal labels associated with a child or young person [4, 9].
Priority Three: Learning environments, curriculum and
assessment
Schools need the flexibility and incentive to adapt learning environments, including forms of
assessment and curricula, to make schools more inclusive by design [10, 11]. For example,
we know that attendance rates are particularly low for neurodivergent children and young
people [3, 4, 12-14]. Suspension and exclusion rates are high for neurodivergent children
and young people. Improving attendance for all children and young people, including those
who are neurodivergent, begins with understanding and addressing why a child is missing
school, rather than relying on sanctions and policies that may worsen anxiety or
disengagement [3, 12, 15]. If a change to standard practice is vital for one child, it is likely
beneficial for all and thus should become the 'new standard'.
Learning environments need to be accessible, paying attention to physical, social, sensory,
and communication barriers [11]. We provide detailed recommendations for delivery within
this report, including proposed national standards that are incorporated within Ofsted
inspections.
Priority Four: Funding, accountability, and commissioning
A robust model needs to be developed to support strategic, integrated commissioning and
planning for councils, educational settings, and health bodies. This model should
incorporate the best data on support needs due to overall neurodivergence prevalence
rates and predicted co-occurring needs, without relying solely on diagnosis rates. It should
incorporate local population data from multiple services (including education, health, and
social care). These data must record ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic position, and
other relevant demographic characteristics. This necessitates better data collection and
linkage at a local level, capturing long-term outcomes across public services, and the
implementation of an accountability framework [4].
The model must support targeted provision of additional funding when required and where
specialist input is needed.
6
Executive summary
Background
The Neurodivergence Task and Finish Group (NDTFG) was commissioned by the
Department for Education (DfE) in November 2024 to provide an expert view and make
recommendations on the best ways to support and meet the needs of neurodivergent
children and young people in mainstream education settings, including consideration of
the types of learning support that need not, and should not, depend on clinical
diagnosis. The Terms of Reference and the membership of the group are listed at the
end of this report (see Annex A). This document is a joint report to which all members of
the group have provided input.
The recommendations of this report reflect the consensus we found for a needs-led
system in which all neurodivergent children and young people can learn and participate. In
making these recommendations, the NDTFG has engaged and consulted with a wide
range of partners and groups, including neurodivergent children, young people, and
parents. The NDTFG has also consulted with:
the DfE Expert Advisory Group for Inclusion
Christine Lenehan, DfE SEND Advisor
the independent ADHD Taskforce, commissioned by NHS England
the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) independent Academic Panel
looking at employment prospects for neurodiverse people
the DfE Change Programme
multiple DfE policy teams engaged with the SEND reforms
the Scientific Advisory Council (SAC).
A full list of those we have engaged with can be found in Annex C. These will be cited as
Guldberg et al (2025) within the text when the NDTFG recommendations rely on evidence
obtained through NDTFG engagement and consultation [16].
Introduction
Neurodiversity is a natural consequence of human variability, and our schools must
therefore be inclusive by design. Neurodivergent children and young people have a
wide range of different types of strengths and (legitimate) needs and should receive
support for their individual needs from an inclusive system [17].
Unfortunately, there is overwhelming evidence that a large proportion of neurodivergent
children and young people do not have their needs met by the current education and
health system [18]. Our work identified a consensus, across a large group of partners with
7
extensive relevant experience, that all parts of the existing system need to focus on
meeting needs [16]. For this alternative needs-led system to succeed we must shift
mindsets and culture, as well as redesign the system.
Government possesses the levers necessary for this culture-change. Our work identified
four key priority areas where these policy levers must be brought to bear:
(i) identification of strengths and needs
(ii) workforce development
(iii) learning environments, curriculum and assessment
(iv) funding, accountability and commissioning
Our group identified nine specific recommendations for policy change within these priority
areas. These recommendations are interrelated and should not be seen or operationalised
in isolation from one another.
We encountered some excellent inclusive practice delivered by local schools during our
work [16]. Schools with this culture demonstrate the potential of inclusive education to
transform a young person's life. Our report outlines concrete proposals on how this cultural
shift can be embedded more widely and highlights the importance of the role of
Educational Psychologists in this process. The priorities we outline, and how they work
together to reinforce a needs-enabled approach, will allow a 'test-and-learn' transition to
implementing a system that works for everyone, including those who are neurodivergent.
Priority One: Timely identification of strengths and needs
Recommendation One: Provide educational professionals with
evidence-based valid and accurate holistic educational assessment,
along with effective support tools
We must separate assessment of educational need from clinical diagnosis. Early Years
settings, schools and colleges, should be provided with holistic, accurate educational
assessment tools, and their application should be independent from any clinical diagnostic
process or screening for specific conditions. This assessment should be scalable, free to
access, validated, developmentally appropriate throughout a child's development
(recognising the dynamic nature of development), strengths as well as needs based,
sensitive to common barriers to learning and participation, and map onto deliverable
education plans to inform effective support [19, 20].
This assessment process needs to incorporate the voice of the neurodivergent young
person and parent/carers by design. The assessment should fold in relevant community,
environmental or contextual factors so that it reflects the place where the neurodivergent
8
young person lives. Crucially, this process must be easily implemented and interpreted by
educational staff and decrease pressure on teaching staff without increasing workload.
Recommendation Two: Introduce a 'commitment to listen' to
parents/carers and neurodivergent young people and recognise where
schools do this well
Whilst schools and teachers are responsible for and have expertise in educational needs
and support strategies, parents/carers should be valued partners in the education of their
children [6]. Parents are not expected to be experts in educational support strategies, but
they know and understand their child. Dialogue between teachers and parents should
include clear expectations about evidence-informed support and adaptations in the
education and home setting, together with regular communication in a format that is
inclusive of parents with learning needs. This 'commitment to listen' must include
mechanisms for receiving and acting on feedback from neurodivergent children and young
people and families.
Recommendation Three: Develop clear partnerships for supporting
neurodivergent needs between education, health, and social care
DfE and DHSC must act at pace to co-ordinate activity for improving service integration.
Health, social care and education should be better integrated with clear local partnership
arrangements. Educational Psychology services should be enabled to play an important
role in these partnerships through collaborating with professionals, supporting schools in
identifying strengths and needs, delivering professional development, engaging with
parents and carers, and providing advice on creating positive learning environments.
Partnerships should enable information sharing across education, health, social care, and
other relevant departments through connected data systems [21].
Children, young people, and their families should be central to this partnership, with clear
signposting for navigating information on support and assessment. This will provide a co-
ordinated approach that ensures support is evidence-based, holistic, consistent, place-
based, and tailored to an individual's strengths and needs.
Priority Two: Workforce Development
Recommendation Four: Provide high quality professional development
on strengths, needs, and support strategies for neurodivergent children
and young people
Professional development for the workforce needs to include knowledge and
understanding of different forms of neurodivergence, and best practice on how to respond
to those differences [10]. Consistent evidence from neurodivergent children and young
9
people highlights that having teachers who understand them makes the biggest difference
to their ability to achieve and thrive in education [16]. Our work highlights the desire of
teachers to support neurodivergent learners, but their training often bears little
resemblance to their subsequent experience in class.
Coherent and consistent professional development needs to run from initial teacher
training and early career framework (ITTECF), through to professional post-qualifying
development. This professional development should include reasonable adjustments
under the Equality Act 2010.
Practical classroom toolkits, online resources, neuro-affirmative strategies, and
placements for trainees in specialist provisions can enhance inclusive practice without
increasing workload.
Priority Three: Learning environments, curriculum and
assessment
Recommendation Five: Allow more flexible forms of assessment and
curriculum
It is essential that the curriculum and assessment system goes further in offering flexibility
to neurodivergent children and young people where necessary. Not just in what is taught,
but in how it is delivered [19, 22]. Topics should reflect children and young peoples'
interests while still developing their essential skillset. Adaptive teaching and individual
holistic educational assessment of strengths/needs must be positioned as the default
model for mainstream education [36].
New research should be commissioned on how adaptive teaching can support the
strengths of neurodivergent children and young people. The research evidence needs to
be built into guidance as we transition to evidence-based education. Research into diverse
and adapted assessment methods should be explored to reduce reliance on formal
academic routes, which can negatively impact on mental health for some young people
[23, 24]. It is possible to balance flexibility with high academic standards through
thoughtful planning.
Recommendation Six: Adapt learning environments and ensure
behaviour policies are rooted in an inclusive school culture that values
understanding, acceptance and curiosity
Inflexible learning environments, teaching styles, physical spaces, and rigid school
policies, often create barriers for neurodivergent children and young people, as well as
some of their neurotypical peers [16]. These barriers may constrain who can access,
benefit from, and function within that learning environment. Clear and robust guidance is
10
vital to ensure policies are designed to reflect and accommodate the diverse needs of all
children and young people, and that reasonable adjustments can be made. It is better for
these diverse needs to be included by design, rather than via a patchwork of often
impractical accommodations for school staff to juggle.
Rooted in a well-developed understanding of neurodivergence, schools should continually
seek to understand the root causes of behaviour and distress and invest in preventative
solutions, underpinned by an inclusive school culture. All school behaviour policies should
include the reasonable adjustments that can be made to ensure inclusion for all children.
Policies need to reflect a change of emphasis towards understanding and supporting
schools to invest in preventative solutions rather than reactive strategies.
Priority Four: Funding, Accountability and Commissioning
Recommendation Seven: Develop a model to support strategic
commissioning and planning for local authorities and health bodies
A robust model needs to be developed to support strategic commissioning and planning
for councils, educational settings, and health bodies. This model should incorporate the
best data on prevalence rates and predicted co-occurring needs [21]. It should incorporate
local population data from multiple services (including education, health, and social care).
These data must record ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic position, and other relevant
demographic characteristics. This necessitates better data collection and linkage at a local
level, capturing long-term outcomes across public services, and the implementation of an
accountability framework.
The model must support targeted provision of additional funding when required and where
specialist input is needed. The model should enable scientific evaluation of what works
best and for which groups.
Recommendation Eight: Increase funding levels to schools to reflect
the level of need within their population so they can support more
neurodivergent children and young people within their core offer
We welcome the additional funding secured in the 2025 Spending Review, and the
commitment that this funding will be used to transform the SEND system. The existing
funding formula for schools should be reformed to more accurately reflect the varying
levels of need within their populations and increase the funds available to respond to
additional needs, including those that are the result of neurodivergence. This means
weighting funding as a function of the number of children with additional needs within the
local population and factors such as socioeconomic disadvantage, English as an
additional language, and the prevalence of adverse childhood experiences [25]. Schools
would be better equipped to provide early assistance, specialist support, and pastoral care
11
as part of their core offer if these factors were more explicitly factored within the core
national funding model [26].
This would allow schools and other service commissioners to flexibly allocate funds
according to local intelligence rather than relying on national aggregate data and
temporary grants.
Recommendation Nine: Develop clear and effective local routes to
resolution when challenges occur
Parents need to have a clear and effective local route to seek a resolution when
complaints and challenges to accessing support occur, without incurring cost. Local
Authorities and schools need to act on concerns without the need for parents to appeal to
Tribunals.
12
Full Report
Background
The Neurodivergence Task and Finish Group (NDTFG) was commissioned by the
Department for Education (DfE) in November 2024 to provide an expert view and make
recommendations on the best ways to support and meet the needs of neurodivergent
children and young people in mainstream education settings, including consideration of
the types of learning support that need not, and should not, depend on clinical
diagnosis. The Terms of Reference and the membership of the group are listed at the
end of this report (see Annex A). This document is a joint report to which all members of
the group have provided input.
The recommendations of this report reflect the consensus we found for a needs-led
system in which all neurodivergent children and young people can learn, participate and
achieve. In making these recommendations, the NDTFG has engaged and consulted with
a wide range of partners and groups, including neurodivergent children, young people, and
parents. The NDTFG has also consulted with:
the DfE Expert Advisory Group for Inclusion
Christine Lenehan, DfE SEND Advisor
the independent ADHD Taskforce, commissioned by NHS England
the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) Academic Panel
the DfE Change Programme
several DfE policy teams
the Scientific Advisory Council (SAC)
A full list of those we have engaged with can be found in Annex C.
Introduction
Neurodiversity - the fact that we all process and experience the world differently - is one
natural consequence of human variability. These naturally occurring processing
differences reflect that each person's brain is unique. There are many underlying causes
of these differences, with one being the particularly lengthy period of human brain
development. Relative to other species our brain development is unusually slow, likely
extending until ~30 years of age (27). This long developmental period maximises the
differences from person to person (28,29). Crucially, not only is this variability naturally
occurring, it also an adaptive feature of our species and central to our success (30-32).
Neurotypical is the term used to describe a population's statistical majority - those who
process the world in-line with societal norms. Neurodivergent children and young people
understand, process, and experience information about the world in a way that differs from
13
societal norms (see definitions of terminology in Annex D). Neurodivergent children and
young people have a wide range of different strengths and needs [17]. When their needs
are not met by learning environments (a disadvantage that can start in the early years of
life), they can be unable to function and participate in learning effectively, and so unable to
realise their strengths. An inclusive education system must celebrate and normalise
neurodiversity and provide the support that ensures neurodivergent children and young
people can thrive, learn effectively and achieve.
Neurodivergence, whilst useful as a single term to describe those who process and
experience the world differently, can sometimes give the false impression that this is a
homogenous group. On the contrary, neurodivergent children and young people can differ,
in terms of both strengths and needs, from the neurotypical majority on several
dimensions, and often along multiple dimensions [16]. Common differences include
sensory processing, communication, language, attention, executive skills (e.g. organising
activities), processing speed and memory [34]. This is certainly not an exhaustive list, and
different combinations of divergence across these and other dimensions results in a very
heterogenous group [16]. These differences can mean that different neurodivergent
learners may experience different barriers to participation and learning.
There is overwhelming evidence that a large proportion of neurodivergent children and
young people do not have their needs met by the current education system (despite the
best efforts of many teachers and schools) [4, 37]. Many of these children and young
people are at greatly increased risk of poor education and health outcomes compared to
their peers. They are more likely to be suspended or absent from school, out of work,
require mental health services, have poor long-term physical health, or end up in the
criminal justice system [1]. This inequity is compounded by structural inequalities
associated with ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic position [10]. This serious systemic
inequity starts early in life. If basic developmental needs are not met, neurodivergent
children and young people may be less able to access and participate fully in our
education system. This inequity can have cascading life-long consequences if not
addressed and can have a devastating impact on a person's life as well as placing
pressure on public services (with the associated strain on the economy) [1]. The
consequences of a failure to recognise and support neurodivergence are immense and the
importance of the lives of our children and young people means that urgent action is
required if the government is to succeed in delivering against its five Missions.
The magnitude of the situation means that simply grafting a new system on top of the
existing overstretched system will not address the inequity [16]. Only fundamental change
in the way education is delivered will ensure the holistic needs of all neurodivergent CYP
are met. However, looking only at the experience of children and young people within
education through the lens of neurodivergence risks creating a parallel system, which
would be both incoherent and unsustainable.
14
All parts of the existing education system should be refocused on meeting needs so
mainstream education can support all children and young people, including
those who are neurodivergent, to thrive and succeed and ensure the future
education system is coherent and sustainable. This would be a generational shift for
our country, and we believe the current confluence of changes in policy, the economy,
and wider society present both an imperative and a clear opportunity to take a
different approach.
Such a needs-led system would recognise that all children and young people learn best -
and succeed and thrive - when their needs are recognised and met. It would build in
'inclusion by default' from the start of every child's education journey, moving towards
models of teaching and learning which are flexible, adaptive, and build a sense of
belonging for every child and young person. The primacy of identifying and meeting needs
as the basis for learning would be recognised and reinforced by all parts of the system,
from funding and commissioning to curriculum, assessment, and inspection. For this
reformed needs-led education system to succeed, we must shift mindsets and culture,
as well as redesign how the system works. To deliver a needs-led system, there needs to
be an unshakeable conviction that this is the right thing to do, for children and young
people, for families, and for the future of our country.
It is vital to emphasise that needs-led approaches are present already in many parts of the
education system - some schools do exemplary work from a needs-led perspective [16]. It
is equally important to understand that a needs-led system is not about giving teachers
more work but about working in different ways [16]. Finally, it is critically important to
understand that responsibility for children and young people's outcomes - and identifying
and meeting their needs - lies outside schools too, with parents, health services, wider
children's services, and other areas of policy.
For many in education, including school leaders, teachers and parents, a needs-led model
of education may seem far away from the current reality. But the potential benefits for our
children and young people of making this shift are very real, and the opportunity to
address inequity, support social cohesion, and build economic success is huge. A needs-
led system is not a refusal to recognise the challenges our teaching workforce have faced
and continue to face - on the contrary, it is realistic, deliverable and sustainable, but only if
approached carefully.
As part of our work, we heard from children and young people who described their positive
experiences of 'can do' schools [16]. These were schools that showed a commitment to
understanding and meeting the needs of their children and young people, and to make
adaptations accordingly. We must ensure that all schools have a 'can do' mindset. This
wider cultural shift will require an education system that places much stronger emphasis
on high quality inclusive practice for all children and young people, celebrates the
diversity of their abilities and backgrounds, and designs provision to recognise and meet
15
the needs of every child and young person from the outset. In doing so, we can evolve the
education system for all children and young people in ways which enable everyone to
succeed, support high standards, and are more cost-effective. The litmus test for whether
we have achieved this cultural shift will not be felt in specific accommodations or
redesigned policies but in whether neurodivergent children fundamentally feel that they
belong in school. We need to see all neurodivergent children as individuals who are
wanted in school, not as problems to be fixed.
Meeting the needs of neurodivergent children and young people should be both the signal
and the gateway for wider reform across our education system. We describe four key
policy priorities for action. These priorities must be scaffolded by a long-term vision with
commitment and input from policymakers, school leaders, teachers, and parents/carers. A
well-planned transition to a new system is needed, changing the fundamentals slowly and
carefully so that teachers and leaders have the time and space to adapt sustainably, and
with the voices of children, young people, and parents/carers placed at the heart of the
process [6]. It is imperative that the highest standards of evidence are adopted at every
stage. If these conditions are not met then any reforms will create an unacceptable level of
risk for many neurodivergent children, young people, and their families
The key priorities for enacting culture and systems change
We have identified the four key priority areas for this culture and systems change as
being:
(i) identification of strengths and needs
(ii) workforce development
(iii) learning environments, curriculum and assessment
(iv) funding, accountability and commissioning
The recommendations outlined here are all interrelated, and none should be viewed in
isolation. For example, the creation of a needs-led system will require the development of
effective educational assessment tools in tandem with the introduction of more integrated
pathways and workforce development between education, health, and social care.
A fundamental principle across all our recommendations for the shift to a needs-led
system is the need for a 'test and learn' implementation approach. This approach allows
for steady cycles of implementation, research, and evaluation, making best use of the
UK's assets, including universities.
16
Priority One: Timely identification of strengths and needs
Recommendation One: Provide educational professionals with evidence
based valid and accurate holistic educational assessment, along with
effective support tools
We must separate assessment of educational need from any clinical diagnosis. Early
Years settings, schools and colleges, should be provided with holistic accurate educational
assessment tools, and their application should be independent from any clinical diagnostic
process or screening for specific conditions. This assessment should be scalable, free to
access, validated, developmentally appropriate throughout a child's development
(recognising the dynamic nature of development), strengths and needs based, sensitive to
common barriers to learning and participation, and map onto deliverable education plans
to inform effective support [19, 20].
This assessment process needs to incorporate the voice of the neurodivergent young
person and parent/carers by design. The assessment should fold in relevant community,
environmental or contextual factors so that it reflects the place where the neurodivergent
young person lives. Crucially, this process must be easily implemented and interpreted by
educational staff and decrease pressure on teaching staff without increasing workload.
Why recommendation one is important
To create an inclusive mainstream system of education, assessment and identification of
educational strengths and needs should be embedded in the system from the outset as
this is an essential element in ensuring educational settings are adaptive to children and
young people's needs [16]. This needs-led approach should begin in early years settings
as well as school settings and must not be delayed in cases where a formal clinical
diagnosis is being sought. Support for educational needs must be disentangled from the
existing clinical diagnostic system, ensuring that children receive timely support even if
they do not meet clinical thresholds, are waiting for a clinical assessment, have needs
outside of the clinical diagnostic frameworks, or do not want to pursue a formal clinical
diagnosis [38].
Meanwhile, holistic educational assessment tools can be designed in a way that makes
any later clinical diagnostic assessment easier [16]. That said, we emphasise here that
this form of education assessment is a different and separate process from diagnostic
assessment for a specific clinical 'condition' and does not replace clinical evaluation.
Pursuing a diagnostic assessment is a matter for individual and parental choice and health
services, with clinical assessment relevant to areas wider than education and sometimes
enabling later support in life.
17
Effective and timely holistic educational assessment is crucial for understanding a child's
strengths and needs [20]. The term 'profiling' is often applied to describe the identification
of strengths and needs via educational assessment. We prefer the term 'holistic
educational assessment' as this reflects the purpose of such approaches. This provides a
comprehensive description of strengths and needs and a clear picture of a child or young
person's development across several developmental domains. An understanding of
strengths and needs is important because success in addressing needs may depend upon
harnessing strengths. Crucially, such assessment should enable targeted support for
areas of difficulty and should be based upon evidence-informed and focused approaches
and strategies.
A holistic assessment of a child's needs can be helpful to parents and educators in
providing a framework, language, and associated strategies for communicating a child's
strengths and needs within the home, in the community, and at school [16]. When this is
done well, it will have positive impacts and reduce stress for neurodivergent children,
young people, and their families [16]. Over time, we anticipate that it will lead to improved
wellbeing through a shared understanding between the young person, their family, and
education staff, and less reliance on the holistic educational assessment tools tailoring
individual support as the environment becomes more inclusive for all children and young
people.
Practical steps to implement recommendation one
1 - Map and review current holistic educational assessment tools that are being
developed
Several tools are currently being developed and used in different localities [16]. These
have different content and conceptual underpinnings and are implemented in different
ways. Research needs to map current tools and systematically review of what is being
used internationally. We need to understand:
what tools and approaches are being used
how tools are used
their respective evidence bases
the developmental domains they cover
the practical barriers and enablers for their use
This work is currently underway and is being undertaken by the 'What Works in SEND'
(WWiS) programme, funded by the DfE, led by Council for Disabled Children (CDC) and
the University of Birmingham. This work will be completed by April 2026.
18
2 - Fund underpinning research and development of holistic assessment tools (for
different ages and stages)
Further research should align with the WWiS funded project on holistic assessment tools
with the goal of developing a set of free, usable, quality assessments that can be deployed
in education settings. This work must draw on current research on child development and
neurodivergence, map common barriers to learning (i.e., be transdiagnostic), and consider
the deliverability of these assessments. This should involve deploying a 'test and learn'
implementation approach, whereby tools used in different localities, or across connected
datasets, are evaluated and expanded.
The result would be a suite of assessments that are underpinned by quality evidence,
incorporating clear guidelines as to how and when they are implemented. Finally, these
tools must be free to use and accessible through a reliable national portal. The motivation
at the heart of this recommendation is to weed-out the barriers and bottlenecks that
currently hamper assessment and access to support.
Recommendation Two: Introduce a 'commitment to listen' to
parents/carers and neurodivergent young people and recognise where
settings do this well
Whilst educational settings and teachers are responsible for, and have expertise in
educational needs and support strategies, parents/carers should be valued partners in the
education of their children. Parents are not expected to be experts in educational support
strategies, but they know and understand their child. Dialogue between teachers and
parents should include clear expectations about evidence-based support and adaptations
in the education setting, together with regular communication in a format that is inclusive
of parents with learning needs. This 'commitment to listen' must include mechanisms for
receiving and acting on feedback from neurodivergent children, young people and their
families.
Why recommendation two is important
Introducing a 'commitment to listen' to parents/carers and neurodivergent young people is
essential if we want to create an education system that is inclusive, responsive, and
grounded in lived experience [5]. Too often, families feel sidelined or unheard when trying
to navigate support for their children, leading to frustration, breakdowns in trust, and
escalating needs that could have been addressed earlier [6]. Listening to those with direct
experience ensures that schools better understand individual needs, adapt their
approaches accordingly, and build collaborative relationships that underpin successful
support. The DfE can signal that valuing the voices of neurodivergent young people and
their families is not optional, but central to effective practice, by celebrating schools that
actively embed this commitment.
19
Practical steps to implement recommendation two
1 - The Department for Education should develop a national framework for what a
'commitment to listen' looks like in practice
This should be co-designed with neurodivergent young people, families, schools, and
academic experts. This framework should include expectations for regular, meaningful
consultation; the use of accessible communication methods; and feedback mechanisms
that inform school improvement plans. It should be about building shared understanding,
trust and expectations. Schools should be supported through professional development,
model policies, and peer learning opportunities to embed this commitment in their culture
and processes.
2 - Good practice needs to be recognised and incentivised
Ofsted should incorporate the quality of engagement with neurodivergent children, young
people and their families into inspection criteria, and local authorities or academy trusts
could introduce incentives for schools that demonstrate strong, inclusive engagement.
Feedback from parents and young people themselves should be used as a key
performance indicator, encouraging schools not only to listen - but to act on what they
hear.
Recommendation Three: Develop clear partnerships for supporting
neurodivergent needs between education, health, and social care
DfE and DHSC must act at pace to co-ordinate activity for improving service integration.
Health, social care, and education should be better integrated with clear local partnership
arrangements. Educational Psychology services should be enabled to play an important
role in these partnerships through collaborating with professionals, supporting schools in
identifying strengths and needs, delivering professional development, engaging with
parents and carers, and providing advice on creating positive learning environments.
Partnerships should facilitate information sharing across education, health, social care,
and other relevant departments through connected data systems [4, 9].
Children, young people, and their families should be central to this partnership, with clear
signposting for navigating information on support and assessment [4, 7, 20]. This will
provide a co-ordinated approach that ensures support is evidence-based, holistic,
consistent, place-based, and tailored to an individual's strengths and needs.
Why recommendation three is important
Public services often work in silos. Connected services would facilitate more holistic
assessment and understanding of a child or young person's needs by drawing on
expertise from education, health, and social care, in turn enabling more tailored and
appropriate approaches and provision [4, 9]. Connected public services would also ensure
20
that health information that may facilitate earlier detection is communicated in a way which
enables early years provisions, schools and colleges to co-ordinate responses to needs.
Collaborative working would enable professionals to develop practical solutions to the
complex cross-organisational barriers that children, young people and families face.
Practical steps to implement recommendation three
1 - Develop strong models for the identification of needs, with recognition and
agreement from all partners at a local level about the importance of early
identification and support
All should agree to play their part in that. These should be underpinned by a set of clear
principles, and should include:
(i) identification of need as early as possible, through an integrated approach
across health and education
(ii) support for neurodivergent children and families which is put in place as early as
possible
(iii) educational assessment, using evidence-based tools, drawing on input and
support from health services where potential or diagnosed neurodivergence has
been detected.
2 - Provide integrated partnership services through multi-disciplinary teams that
bring together specialists, alongside education professionals
They should share insight and develop joint strategies to help schools to support
neurodivergent children and young people. They should exchange data and information on
good practice, work closely with parents, and provide effective signposting for navigating
information and further support [16].
3 - Learn from the planned evaluation of the Partnerships for Inclusion of
Neurodiversity in Schools (PINS) programme
This should specifically focus on the scalability, adaptability, transferability, and
sustainability of the programme, its value for money in improving outcomes along with
implementation fidelity and impact on children, staff, and families.
4 - When partner agencies from health work directly in schools and/or with
individuals, there needs to be a platform for incorporating their voice and expertise
into targeted resource and support plans
For example, referrals to mental health services should include a review of the school
support plan for that child or young person to help clarify if it is therapeutic support that
they need, or if it is a change in the school environment that would improve wellbeing and
mental health [16].
21
Priority Two: Workforce Development
Recommendation Four: Provide high quality professional development
on strengths, needs, and support strategies for neurodivergent children
and young people
Professional development for the workforce needs to include knowledge and
understanding of different forms of neurodivergence, and best practice on how to respond
to those differences [10]. Consistent evidence from neurodivergent children and young
people highlights that having teachers who understand them makes the biggest difference
to their ability to achieve and thrive in education [4]. Our engagement with organisations
and individuals highlighted the desire of teachers to support neurodivergent learners, but
their training often bears little resemblance to their subsequent experience in class (16).
Coherent and consistent professional development needs to run from initial teacher
training and early career framework (ITTECF), through to professional post-qualifying
development. This professional development should include reasonable adjustments
under the Equality Act 2010. Practical classroom toolkits, online resources, neuro-
affirmative strategies, and placements for trainees in specialist provisions can enhance
inclusive practice without increasing workload.
Why recommendation four is important
High quality professional development and support on inclusion for all staff and senior
leaders will shift school culture and build greater awareness at all levels of the workforce,
enabling the system to be truly needs-led [16]. Together with changes in the Ofsted
assessment criteria to measure inclusion, this will support a positive culture in which
schools choose to prioritise inclusion and meet needs by default.
Practical steps to implement recommendation four
1 - Develop a clear workforce strategy related to neurodivergent children and young
people
Ensure there is a standardised professional development and competency framework
which empowers teachers and support staff to deliver inclusive practice consistently [4, 9].
The workforce will need coherent and consistent professional development on the needs
and support for neurodivergent children and young people, running from the ITTECF
through to post-qualifying professional development. This should build in a minimum
amount of material into ITTECF on responding to needs that commonly present because
of neurodivergence.
The broader workforce strategy for professional development should prioritise professional
development through NPQs for Head teachers and experienced teachers. Educators and
22
multi-agency teams should have access to ongoing refresher training to maintain high
quality inclusive practice.
2 - Build a transition programme for the sector around the establishment of the
individual strengths/needs holistic assessment
This should include leadership training on a needs-led culture, teaching and learning. This
should include whole school learning and development, reflecting the myriad case studies
showing how mainstream settings have shifted practice and culture towards meeting
needs. Expert support needs to be provided to mainstream schools/settings from specialist
providers, focusing on neurodivergence.
3 - Establish a national training entitlement that guarantees all school staff
(including teachers, teaching assistants, senior leaders, and governors) access to
ongoing, high-quality professional development on neurodivergence
This should include knowledge and understanding of neurodivergence, with a focus on
strengths-based, inclusive practice. It should support school staff to recognise and know
how to support children and young people's strengths and needs, including how to use the
holistic educational assessment tools. One-off sessions are rarely effective on their own
[16].
Professional development should be integrated into school improvement plans, with
follow-up coaching, peer learning networks, and time allocated for staff to reflect on and
adapt their practice collaboratively.
4 - Co-deliver content with experts by experience, including young people and
families
Professional development courses, where possible, should be co-delivered with
neurodivergent young people, families, and experts by experience to ensure authenticity,
relevance, and insight. This would help challenge outdated stereotypes and ground
professional development in real-life perspectives.
5 - Enhance the Head Teacher and Teachers Standards
To strengthen inclusive design of schools and classrooms, with means of measuring that
these standards have been met. This includes providing clear standards to ensure schools
are inclusive and neuro affirmative.
6 - Support senior leadership and whole-school culture
Professional development must be championed by school leaders if it is to be sustainable
[16]. Programmes should include development opportunities for headteachers and senior
teams on how to embed neurodiversity-inclusive values into school culture, policies,
curriculum, and resource planning involving all school staff.
23
7 - Create a competency framework
To articulate the knowledge and competencies needed by head teachers and teachers
and provide clear professional development for ensuring those competencies are met.
8 - Develop an online hub which gives guidance to education staff on the support
for children and young people's needs, including for those who are neurodivergent
A one-stop-shop online hub, which should include resources co-produced with individuals
with lived experience, should be developed to provide professionals with information and
support. This online hub will consist of tools, practical advice and guidance, sharing of
good practice and resources, and up to date information.
9 - Update Ofsted key lines of enquiry to interrogate levels of staff professional
development
Expectations should be set that a school cannot be considered inclusive if professional
development programmes on SEND and neurodivergence do not exist or are not
implemented.
10 - Monitor impact and adjust accordingly
Schools and local authorities should have tools to evaluate the effectiveness of
professional development both in terms of staff confidence and, crucially, improvements in
outcomes and experiences for neurodivergent children and young people. This feedback
should inform future planning and investment.
Priority Three: Learning environments, curriculum and
assessment
Recommendation Five: Allow more flexible forms of assessment and
curriculum
It is essential that the curriculum and assessment system goes further in offering flexibility
to neurodivergent children and young people - not just in what is taught, but in how it is
delivered [19,22]. Topics should reflect children and young peoples' interests and passions
while still developing essential skills. Adaptive teaching and individual holistic assessment
of strengths/needs must be positioned as the default model for mainstream education [36].
New research should be commissioned on how adaptive teaching can support
neurodivergent children and young people. The research evidence needs to be built into
guidance as we transition to evidence-informed education. Research into diverse and
adapted assessment methods should be explored to reduce reliance on formal academic
routes, which can negatively impact on mental health for some young people [23, 24]. It is
possible to balance flexibility with high academic standards through thoughtful planning,
ensuring all learners can thrive.
24
Why recommendation five is important
Inflexibility in what is taught and how it is delivered may create barriers to neurodivergent
children and young people engaging in classroom activity [16]. Traditional modes of
assessment such as timed exams requiring recall of knowledge may make it hard for
some neurodivergent children and young people to show what they know and the skills
they have developed [39]. From an early age some neurodivergent children and young
people learn that school is not 'for them' and they can become disengaged or experience
distress, deterioration in mental health and potential crisis [16].
Making the curriculum rewarding and assessments valid for all children and young people,
including those who are neurodivergent, is essential to keeping them embedded in the
school community [16].
Practical steps to implement recommendation five
1 - The curriculum should include materials on neurodiversity and neurodivergence
for all children and young people, including how it is relevant to their lives
This could incorporate or build on the 'Learning about Neurodiversity in Schools' (LEANS)
programme, for example, an evidence-based approach to introducing neurodiversity to
children and young people [40].
2 - Curriculum planning should allow for adaptive teaching approaches
Use adaptive teaching that recognises diverse ways of thinking and engaging, supported
by accessible teaching materials and assistive technologies.
3 - Child and young person specific formative classroom assessment
Assessment should recognise diverse ways of demonstrating knowledge, strengths, and
progression.
4 - Access Assistive technologies
Assistive technology (e.g., speech-to-text, visual organisers) should be used to support
personalised access to the curriculum.
5 - Introduce optional modules or 'passion projects' that align with children and
young peoples' interests
Particularly in KS3 and KS4, while still mapping to key skill areas such as literacy,
numeracy, and problem-solving.
6 - Promote thematic, cross-curricular projects
Where children and young people can demonstrate understanding in flexible ways (e.g.,
through art, video, and model-making).
25
7 - Research and review 'high-stakes' testing formats
Consider how the reliance on timed, written exams impacts on neurodiverse children and
young people.
8 - Fund longitudinal and experimental studies
On how best to use adaptive teaching to support neurodivergent learners' attainment,
wellbeing, and engagement, and make the findings accessible.
9 - National Curriculum reforms
As the National Curriculum is refreshed through the work of the national Curriculum and
Assessment Review, ensure that it includes the lens of neurodiversity and flexibility and
that neurodivergent learners and their families are involved, using structured feedback
tools.
10 - Review Progress 8
Review progress 8 measures to enable schools and neurodivergent children and young
people to have more flexible options.
11 - Provide guidance on learning environments
Support schools on accommodations they can make to make the learning environment
more enabling for neurodivergent children and young people.
Recommendation Six: Adapt learning environments and ensure
behaviour policies are rooted in an inclusive school culture that values
understanding, acceptance and curiosity.
Along with their peers, neurodivergent children benefit from schools that are calm,
inclusive, safe and secure. Any learning environment requires structure, routine and
predictability. However, inflexible learning environments and rigid school policies can
create barriers for neurodivergent children and young people, as well as some of their
neurotypical peers, limiting their ability not only to access and benefit from the learning
environment, but to be able to function within it.
Clear and robust guidance is vital to ensure policies are designed to reflect and
accommodate the diverse needs of all children and young people, and that reasonable
adjustments can be made. It is better for neurodivergence to be included by design,
rather than via a patchwork of often impractical accommodations for school staff to juggle.
Rooted in a well-developed understanding of neurodivergence, schools should continually
seek to understand the root causes of behaviour and distress and invest in preventative
solutions, underpinned by an inclusive school culture. All school behaviour policies should
include the reasonable adjustments that can be made to ensure inclusion for all children.
26
Policies need to reflect a change of emphasis towards understanding and supporting
schools to invest in preventative solutions rather than reactive strategies.
Why recommendation six is important
A strong ethos of belonging helps create a safe and secure environment where all
children and young people feel respected and supported [16]. An inclusive school culture
is not built through compliance alone, but through relationships, understanding, trust,
safety and a shared sense of belonging. By focusing on support, schools can build
behaviour systems that nurture rather than exclude. Adapting learning environments and
rooting behaviour policies in a calm and inclusive school culture is vital to ensuring that
every child, regardless of background, ability, or neurotype, feels safe and valued and is
able to attain and thrive [41]. Structure, routine and predictability are important aspects of
the learning environment but must not be at the expense of understanding children and
young people's individual needs. Embedding values of acceptance and curiosity
encourages children to see difference as a strength and creates a school community
where diversity is celebrated, not managed [16]. In this kind of environment, learning
becomes more meaningful and more accessible for everyone, and attainment and broader
outcomes will improve [42].
There is evidence that some traditional classroom models and rigid behaviour systems
marginalise some neurodivergent children whose needs don't align with the norm,
including those who have experienced trauma, or face social and emotional challenges
[13, 43]. Neurodivergent children and young people can experience distress at school in a
range of ways, including sensory overload or anxiety, and their distress can be
misunderstood by educators as defiance or lack of cooperation [12]. Some
communication, such as stimming, can be misunderstood in the same way. Having an
inclusive and supportive school culture, well-developed staff knowledge of
neurodivergence, and a focus on understanding the individual needs of the child or young
person, all contribute to helping educators make the crucial distinction between
deliberately disruptive behaviour and distress [16]. School staff can be helped to respond
effectively and compassionately by being trained to understand neurodivergence, and to
recognise the effects that trauma and distress can have on both learning and behaviour.
This cultural shift will allow more schools to become inclusive by starting from a position of
understanding the "why" behind a child or young person's actions [13].
When schools design their environments and expectations with flexibility, empathy, and
equity at their core, they create the conditions where all children can develop socially and
emotionally, in addition to achieving academically [16]. Approaches should focus on
creating calm, safe and supportive learning environments that reflect an understanding of
neurodivergence and recognise that strong and positive relationships and interactions are
fundamental to learning and wellbeing.
27
Having clear links with health and social care partners who provide support for parents
and young people around behaviour at home can foster stronger links and deepen
understanding around distress behaviours.
Practical steps to implement recommendation six
1 - Ensure inclusion staff teams with knowledge of neurodivergence exist within
schools
These should include the SENCo, and another qualified member of staff (ideally with
QTS), who are responsible for working with class teachers, families and children to ensure
that all those involved are supported.
2 - Embed neuroinclusive design principles across all aspects of the school setting
This includes creating sensory-friendly classrooms with flexible seating, quiet spaces, and
appropriate lighting to accommodate a range of sensory needs for neurodivergent children
and young people. Structured and calm environments that use visual methods of
communication in which educators also adjust the ways they communicate and interact
are essential to neurodivergent children and young people. Schools should be supported
through national investment in inclusive infrastructure, with practical guidance and funding
to make physical adaptations tailored to their population [44].
3 - Build on evidence-based models and frameworks for teaching and learning
Schools should be supported to adopt evidence-based models such as Universal Design
for Learning (UDL) and relational practice. National guidance should signpost schools to
accredited providers and toolkits that align with these principles [45].
4 - National standards for SEN
These should provide clear expectations around the importance of neuroinclusive culture,
adaptive teaching and reasonable adjustments, effective holistic assessment, prioritising
needs and listening to parents. There should be accountability and governance for these
national standards along with funding for SEN support. These standards can ensure
inclusive leadership is recognised, valued, and rewarded and that inclusivity is included in
school monitoring processes.
5 - The Ofsted inspection framework needs to include clear specification of the
characteristics of an enabling and inclusive learning environment
Including for neurodivergent children, in line with the national standards. Specific 'culture
checks' around understanding of neurodivergence and commitment to recognising and
meeting the needs of neurodivergent children should include the extent to which schools
listen to parents of neurodivergent children and young people.
28
6 - Behaviour policies must move away from one-size-fits-all approaches
They should be based on an approach that works for the individual child, building on
respectful relationships and a deep understanding of each child's context [46]. Schools
should be encouraged to ask, "what does this child need to succeed?" rather than "how
can we make them comply?" and all school behaviour policies should include the
reasonable adjustments that can be made to ensure inclusion for all children.
Practical steps include investing in staff professional development and ensuring that
behaviour frameworks are co-produced with children, young people and their families,
especially those with lived experience of exclusion or unmet need [41].
7 - Improving attendance for neurodivergent children and young people begins with
understanding and addressing the root causes of their absence
This includes the need to recognise that the framing of non-attendance in neurodivergent
children and young people as 'school refusal' and 'school avoidance' frames the problem
as being inherent within the child or young person. Evidence shows that non-attendance
can be driven by educational environments and staff that do not understand and adapt to
the needs of neurodivergent children and young people, with distress being a clear cause
for non-attendance [12, 47]. Schools must create supportive environments that prioritise
belonging, sensory needs, and emotional well-being along with alternative arrangements
such as virtual schooling as part of a support offer for children and young people in crisis,
to help transition them back into school [15].
Co-produced attendance policies, developed in partnership with children, young people,
parents, and staff, are more likely to reflect real needs and foster trust [16]. By shifting
from punishment to support, schools can build a culture where all children and young
people feel able and willing to attend.
Priority Four: Funding, accountability and commissioning
Recommendation Seven: Develop a model to support strategic
commissioning and planning for local authorities and health bodies
A robust model needs to be developed to support strategic commissioning and planning
for councils, educational settings, and health bodies. This model should incorporate the
best data on prevalence rates and predicted co-occurring needs [21]. It should incorporate
local population data from multiple services (including education, health, and social care)
[4]. These data must record ethnicity, gender and socioeconomic position, and other
relevant demographic characteristics. This necessitates better data collection and linkage
at a local level, capturing long-term outcomes across public services, and the
implementation of an accountability framework.
29
The model must support targeted provision of additional funding when required and where
specialist input is needed. The model should enable scientific evaluation of what works
best and for which groups.
Why recommendation seven is important
Without cohesive commissioning models, services in health and education often operate in
silos, leading to insufficient resources [26]. This lack of insight can result in resources
being distributed unevenly, leaving some communities underserved. It is therefore
important to invest in a unified system that provides real-time data and analytics to inform
commissioning decisions and track outcomes.
Practical steps to implement recommendation seven
1 - There is a need for research into the development of commissioning models and
tools that reflect neurodivergence, to ensure appropriate support and school places
are tailored towards local need.
This research should be used to develop a national model that provides a consistent, data-
informed framework for identifying local needs, aligning services, and planning long-term
support for neurodivergent children and young people.
2 - The model should be co-designed by a multidisciplinary group including
commissioners, service providers, education leaders, clinicians, and families with
lived experience
It should bring together health, education, and social care data to enable local areas to
understand trends in need, service gaps, and pressure points. This would allow for more
proactive, joined-up planning. The model should also provide tools for forecasting future
demand and evaluating the impact of early support strategies.
3 - Practical implementation steps would include piloting the model in selected
areas with diverse demographics and system challenges, ensuring it is adaptable to
different local contexts
The DfE and DHSC should jointly lead this work, providing funding, technical expertise,
and oversight, with findings from such a 'test-and-learn' implementation approach used to
refine and scale the approach nationally.
4 - Local commissioners should receive training and support to use the model
effectively, including developing shared outcomes frameworks, pooling budgets,
and engaging families meaningfully in planning processes
A national repository of best practice, case studies, and templates could further support
adoption. There is a need to place educational settings at the heart of this process so that
the organisations with the responsibility for delivery and the most detailed understanding
of the issues can shape the commissioning decisions.
30
5 - Government should require improved data to be collected at a local area,
including increased measures around progress and wellbeing
This could be pursued on a pan-SEN level, but it is important that the data collected must
allow for sufficiently granular data on the profiles of needs of children to enable effective
commissioning. The most feasible way of doing this is through recording primary
educational need.
Recommendation Eight: Increase funding levels to schools to reflect
the level of need within their population so they can support more
neurodivergent children and young people within their core offer
We welcome the additional funding secured in the 2025 Spending Review, and the
commitment that this funding will be used to transform the SEND system. The existing
funding formula for schools should be reformed to more accurately reflect the varying
levels of need within their populations and increase the funds available to respond to
additional needs, including those that are the result of neurodivergence. This means
weighting funding as a function of the number of children with additional needs within the
local population and factors such as socioeconomic disadvantage, English as an
additional language (EAL), and the prevalence of adverse childhood experiences [25].
Schools would be better equipped to provide early assistance, specialist support, and
pastoral care as part of their core offer if these factors were more explicitly factored within
the core national funding model [26].
This would allow schools and other service commissioners to flexibly allocate funds
according to local intelligence rather than relying on national aggregate data and
temporary grants.
Why recommendation eight is important
Funding challenges within the system can arise from fragmented financial structures,
constrained budgets, and increasing demand, resulting in disparities in resource allocation
[26]. Reliance on statutory support (EHCP funding), often requires lengthy administrative
hurdles for school staff which further complicate and delay the distribution of funds,
depriving those in need of timely support [16].
There is growing evidence that children facing disadvantage-whether through poverty,
trauma, or special educational needs-are less likely to thrive in school without targeted,
sustained support. Yet too often, schools serving the highest-need communities are the
most under-resourced, forced to stretch limited budgets across growing demand [5].
Without a funding system that matches resources to need, we risk entrenching cycles of
educational inequality and widening the attainment gap, particularly in areas hit hardest by
economic hardship.
31
Furthermore, schools are increasingly being asked to act as a front line of support for
children's mental health, safeguarding, and wellbeing, but without the resources to deliver
this support effectively [26]. In order to improve life chances and reduce long-term costs to
health, social care, and criminal justice systems, the government must invest in
educational settings as hubs of early support. A needs-led funding model would not only
deliver better outcomes for children but would also represent a more preventative,
sustainable approach to public spending.
Practical steps to implement recommendation eight
1 - The funding and staffing of support services
These must be based on rigorous data relating to the number of children with additional
needs in a local authority, including those that are the result of neurodivergence. The
government should apportion this funding before allocation to schools and academies to
avoid financial disincentives.
2 - Apply appropriate funding formulas
To support the implementation of Government plans to improve the allocation of funding to
schools to meet needs of all children and increase transparency and accountability, it
should ensure that the formulas used to decide allocations appropriately to resource
schools to meet additional needs, including those of neurodivergent children.
3 - Evidence of use
As part of the requirements to report on how funding is allocated at a school level, schools
should report on how that funding has been applied to the support of children and young
people with additional needs, including those that are the result of neurodivergence.
4 - Ofsted reviews
Ofsted should inspect the use of funding within each school, and this should specifically
look at how effectively neurodivergent children are being supported. A school should not
be able to achieve a good Ofsted rating without demonstrating this commitment to support
all children.
Recommendation Nine: Develop clear and effective local routes to
resolution when challenges occur
Parents and carers need to have a clear and effective local route to seek a resolution that
is fair to their child when complaints and challenges to accessing support occur, without
incurring cost. Local Authorities and schools need to act on concerns without the need for
parents to appeal to a Tribunal.
32
Why recommendation nine is important
It is critically important to ensure that families can access timely, fair, and supportive
responses to their child's learning needs without unnecessary escalation. Currently, many
parents feel they must fight or navigate complex and adversarial processes, often
involving appeals, tribunals, or legal action, to simply secure the support their child needs
[16]. This not only places an unsustainable and damaging emotional and financial burden
on families but also consumes significant public resources. Moreover, these barriers
create and exacerbate structural inequalities within our society. Establishing trusted local
mechanisms for resolution can reduce conflict, restore relationships, and ensure that the
child's best interests remain at the heart of the process [16].
Practical steps to implement recommendation nine
1 - Effective local dispute resolution
Effective local routes should offer families an accessible pathway to raise concerns,
mediate disagreements, and resolve disputes collaboratively with schools and local
authorities. This requires more than a simple policy fix. It demands a cultural shift that
values transparency, active listening, and partnership.
2 - The existing SEND system should become more responsive
By embedding early resolution practices (e.g., mediation and independent advocacy) and
ensuring decision-making is informed by both professional expertise and lived experience.
Ultimately, resolving issues locally and constructively helps maintain trust, prevent delay in
support, and improve outcomes for neurodivergent children and young people.
3 - Government should set out in guidance how early signs from neurodivergent
children and young people that needs are not being met should trigger action
For example, there should be an expectation that when a child or parent raises a concern,
there is a conversation involving them about what steps could be taken to address it.
Notes and actions from that meeting should be agreed, recorded and followed up to check
they have resolved the issue. Government should consider applying this to all children with
SEND. If an issue progresses to a complaint or appeal, the Ombudsman and Tribunal
should be granted access to these records. Where it is evident that schools and councils
have not engaged in good faith or pursued agreed actions, decision makers should reflect
this in their decision/award. In particular, tribunal judges should consider an appropriate
costs order against the council.
4 - The SEND Tribunal should continue to report cases with the primary educational
need of the child or young person at the centre of the appeal
These data should be used by DfE to consider where further guidance is needed to
councils, and Ofsted and the CQC for Local Area SEND Inspections where high levels of
appeals or judgments against councils are the result of practice that should be improved.
33
Annex A - Terms of Reference
Background
This government is committed to improving inclusivity and expertise in mainstream
settings to break down barriers to education for children and young people with SEND,
alongside ensuring that specialist settings can support children with the most complex
needs. The work of the Neurodivergence Task and Finish Group (NDTFG) will support this
mission, advising government on how to help improve inclusivity and expertise in
mainstream settings in a way that works for neurodivergent children and young people.
Purpose
To provide an expert view and make recommendations on the best ways to support and
meet the needs of neurodivergent children and young people in mainstream education
settings, including consideration of the types of support that need not, or should not,
depend on diagnosis.
How the group will work
The group will consider relevant academic and professional evidence, lived experiences,
and examples of best practice to inform their recommendations. Where appropriate, the
group may draw on international examples, including from the rest of the UK.
In developing advice, the group will draw on a wide range of inputs, including consultation
with education professionals in both the mainstream and specialist sectors, alongside
other experts, parents, children and young people, and stakeholders such as employers,
colleges, trade unions, and charities. The group may establish specialist sub-groups to
support this.
The group will work closely with the Expert Advisory Group for Inclusion, and Dame
Christine Lenehan as the government's strategic adviser on SEND. The group will also
work closely with the independent ADHD Taskforce (convened by NHSE) and interact with
and consider other government department initiatives on neurodivergence.
Timings
The group will meet for the first time in December 2024 and will last for up to 8 months.
The duration may be subject to change following ministerial decisions.
34
Membership
CHAIR - Professor Karen Guldberg, Head of the School of Education, Professor of
Autism Studies and former Director of the Autism Centre for Education and Research
at the University of Birmingham
Heba Al-Jayoosi, Assistant Headteacher and Inclusion & Research Leader at
Mayflower Primary School, Deputy Regional Leader at Whole School SEND, NASEN
Professor Duncan Astle, Gnodde Goldman Sachs Professor of Neuroinformatics in
the Department of Psychiatry, and a Deputy Director at the MRC Cognition and Brain
Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge
Dr Jo Bromley, Strategic Lead for Learning Disabilities and Autism, Consultant
Clinical Psychologist, CAMHS, Manchester Foundation NHS Trust
Ellen Broomé, CEO of the British Dyslexia Association
Zoe Burlison, Inclusion Lead at The Ruth Gorse Academy, Leeds
Dr James Cusack, Chair of Embracing Complexity and CEO of Autistica
Hayden Ginns (MBE), Assistant Director for Children (Performance and
Commissioning), Portsmouth City Council
Adam Micklethwaite, Director of the Autism Alliance
Professor Mark Mon-Williams, Chair in Cognitive Psychology at the University of
Leeds. Professor of Psychology at the Bradford Institute of Health and Director of
Centre for Applied Education Research (CAER). Professor of Paediatric Vision at The
Norwegian Centre for Vision
Tim Nicholls, Assistant Director of Policy, Research and Strategy at National Autistic
Society
Professor Anita Thapar, Professor of Psychological Medicine and Clinical
Neuroscience at University of Cardiff; Chair of the ADHD Taskforce
Acknowledgements
The NDTFG has been supported by the DfE secretariat.
The NDTFG has also been supported by Rebecca Bartram, Research Fellow at University
of Birmingham, Professor Laura Crane at University of Birmingham and PhD students
Nikki Smith and Charlotte Brooks who are both neurodivergent together with Dr Megan
Wood, Nell Schofield, Maleeha Ali, and Sumiyya Sajid from Born in Bradford's Centre for
Applied Educational Research (CAER). These individuals show the desire within the
academic community to support an inclusive education system.
35
Annex B - Methodology
The group convened for the first time in December 2024 and met at least monthly, in order
to inform this report. The meetings focused on exploring key themes affecting
neurodivergent children and young people.
Between meetings, members actively engaged with a diverse range of stakeholders
(Annex C) to gather insights and feedback, which they brought back to inform the group's
discussions and recommendations.
Report development process
The Neurodivergence Task and Finish Group engaged in a range of structured processes
designed to guide exploration of the group's key focus areas and inform their
recommendations. This included extensive consultation with scientific evidence. Two of
the practical processes are outlined below.
Identifying Barriers and Enablers
To identify the key barriers facing neurodivergent children and young people in
mainstream education, group members collaboratively contributed to a comprehensive
mapping process. This process enabled them to capture a wide range of challenges and
encouraged a holistic understanding of the systemic obstacles in place.
The group then explored underlying root causes for these, and identified practical
solutions to mitigate for/ address these barriers.
Delphi process
The NDTFG then built on this using the Delphi Method, a structured and iterative approach
which has been developed as a way to gather insights and opinions from a panel of
experts in order to reach a consensus on a topic or an issue. Within the NDTFG the Delphi
process was used to help to create and prioritise recommendations.
The Chair developed a series of broad statements which aligned to key areas of challenge
as identified through the barriers and enablers process. The members then fed back their
views on these statements, and the statements were refined and prioritised through
discussion and debate. These finalised statements have formed the foundation of the
group's recommendations presented in this report.
36
Annex C - Engagement with the sector
The recommendations developed by the Neurodivergence Task and Finish Group were
directly shaped by members' extensive engagement with the sector. This engagement
was vital in understanding the challenges faced by neurodivergent children and young
people and to inform meaningful, practical solutions. Throughout the process, members
consulted a wide range of individuals and groups across education, health, social care,
academics, charities and those with lived experience.
Parents, Carers and those with lived experience
National Network of Parent Carer Forums (NNPCF)
National Autistic Society Parent Questionnaire
Council for Disabled children (CDC) - Parents and Carers group
Special Needs Jungle
CDC facilitated roundtable on Dyscalculia, including Dyscalculia Network, experts and
those with lived experience.
CDC facilitated roundtable on Developmental Language Disorder (DLD), including
Speech and Language UK, experts and those with lived experience.
Neurodivergent Children, Young People and Adults
FLARE- DfE Young People's SEND Advisory Group
Office of the Children's Commissioner Children and Young People SEND Panel
National Autistic Society Online Children and Young People Survey
Ambitious about Autism engagement group for neurodivergent young people
Survey to neurodivergent young people and adults
Neurodivergent doctoral students
Education Staff
NPQ SENCO Cohort, Leeds
Midlands Headteachers Network
National Association for Special Educational Needs Whole School SEND Team
Schools from ITE Providers at the University of Birmingham
CEOs and Headteachers of Schools including at all age phases including specialist
provision
Leora Cruddas, CEO, Confederation of Schools Trusts
NDTFG members School Staff Networks (Survey)
STARS - AET Hub for Yorkshire and Humber
GORSE academies trust - SEND partnership meeting
Veronica Armson, Executive Headteacher of Phoenix School
37
Colin Townsend, Principal, University of Birmingham School
Hardip Bissell and Tosin Gabriel, Principal and Vice Principal of James Brindley
Academy
Chadsgrove School, Bromsgrove
Sarah Wild, Headteacher, Limpsfield Grange School
Charities and networks
What works in SEND Group
Jane Harris, CEO, Speech and Language UK
Square Peg
SEND Community Alliance
National Campaigners Group (Elaine Davis-Kimble)
Charities from across the Autism Alliance
Council for Disabled children (CDC) - Members group
Academics and sector leads
Prithvi Perepa, Associate Professor in Autism Studies (University of Birmingham)
Anthea Gulliford, Associate Professor Educational Psychology (University of
Birmingham)
Professor Julie Allen, Professor of Equity and Inclusion (University of Birmingham)
Dr Penny Hannant, Programme Lead: Dyslexia and Literacy Difficulties (University of
Birmingham)
Laura Crane, Professor of Autism Studies (University of Birmingham)
Amy Grove and Richard Hastings, Professor of Implementation Science and Professor
of Psychology Health and Social Care (University of Birmingham)
Professor Courtenay Norbury, Professor of Developmental Language &
Communication Disorders, UCL
Julia Carroll, Professor of Psychology in Education (University of Birmingham)
Marie Dunnion and Joanna Moss, Cerebra Network for neurodevelopmental disorders
Penny Smith and Meanu Bajwa-Patel, 'What works in SEND' team, University of
Warwick
Barbara Sandland, autistic Research Fellow, University of Birmingham
Charlotte Brooks, neurodivergent PhD student, University of Birmingham
Nikki Smith, autistic PhD student, University of Brighton
Emma Fisher, PhD student, University of Newcastle
Gemma Cartwright, Consultant Occupational Therapist, System Clinical Lead for
Neurodiversity (Coventry and Warwickshire), NHS England regional Clinical Director
for Autism
38
DfE and across-government
Tom Rees, Chair of the Expert Advisory Group on Inclusion (EAG)
Dame Christine Lenehan, DfE Strategic Advisor on SEND
Dr Anne Heavey, Director of Insights for Ambition Institute
DfE Governor Network
DfE SENDAP Change Programme Advisory Group
DfE Stakeholder Early Years Network
DfE Improving Education Together (IET) SEND Sub-Group
Professor Anita Thapar, Chair of the NHS England ADHD Taskforce
Professor Amanda Kirby, Chair of the DWP Academic Panel
Professor Becky Francis, CBE, Chair of the National Curriculum and Assessment
Review
DfE Research and Evidence Roundtable
Helen Hayes, Chair of the House of Commons Education Select Committee
DfE Science Advisory Council
House of Lords Committee on the Autism Act 2009
Other groups - local and national, including health providers
A needs-led ND system for Leeds meeting, inc. LA and other bodies
North-West Diagnosticians Group
North-West Neurodiversity in Education Group
39
Annex D - Terminology used in this report
Neurodiversity: describes the population as a whole and recognises the diversity and
importance of different brain architectures. Neurotypical describes most of the population,
the majority group, that express themselves in ways that are seen as the societal "norm".
Neurodivergence: Generally, neurodivergence describes behaviours exhibited by a group
of people whose brain, or neurological development, or function, or ways of processing
information, or experiences of the typical environment differ from what is often considered
to be "typical" or the behaviours demonstrated by the majority. The term 'neurodivergence'
can encompass those who would meet diagnostic criteria for a neurodevelopmental
diagnosis (and commonly is used in this manner in clinical and research sectors) but the
term neurodivergence is not restricted to specific diagnoses.
* Neurodevelopmental diagnoses can be viewed as differences rather than as deficit, and
the term neurodivergence is preferred by many with lived experience.
In contrast to clinical diagnoses, there is not a nationally or internationally accepted
definition of the term neurodivergence and the term is not included in clinical diagnostic
manuals. The definition is evolving and may vary by context.
Needs: The assessment and definition of needs depends on the context and sector
involved (e.g. school, home, education, social care, workplace health care), varies with
development, and is dynamic. The purpose of a 'needs' assessment is to identify strengths
and challenges in a particular context and work out how best to support an individual to
optimise their functioning and outcomes and reduce negative impacts. A needs-based
assessment does not necessarily result in or require a diagnosis.
Holistic educational assessment: (also known as developmental profiling): The
structured process of building a holistic picture of a child's strengths and needs across
multiple domains (e.g. cognition, communication, sensory, social-emotional, and physical
development). It draws on educator observations, parent input, and, where appropriate,
health data, to guide tailored educational support and trigger referrals to more specialist
services when needed. Unlike diagnostic assessments, it does not classify or label, but
instead supports timely, responsive support within an inclusive framework. The aim of
such assessment is to understand a child's strengths and needs especially in terms of
their learning and how their other characteristics (e.g., sensory needs) affect their learning
or other outcomes (e.g., social outcomes in the community).
An assessment of needs should link directly to support strategies to help the person
develop specific non-academic skills and/or lead to a better understanding of a child's
needs and the related adaptations that they may require. This type of assessment is not
about diagnosis, nor focused on academic progress.
40
Educational Needs (EN): refers to the barriers to skill acquisition experienced by a child
or young person which, in the absence of tailored support, result in a significantly greater
difficulty in learning than most others of the same age. These needs arise not solely from
medical conditions but also from structural, social, developmental, or environmental
factors, and may be temporary or enduring, health-related or not. SEN should not be
viewed as a fixed state describing the child, but as an interaction between the learner and
their environment, where educational participation and progression are hindered because
a child's specific needs are not met by support systems. A needs-led approach recognises
that many such needs can be met effectively through responsive teaching, adapted
provision, and timely support, without requiring diagnostic labelling or categorisation.
Education: the process by which children and young people are supported to acquire the
skills they need to thrive in adulthood and contribute to a healthy, prosperous, and happy
society. It involves guiding learners to solve the problems posed by developmental and life
tasks through experiences that promote adaptation, participation, and growth. Skill
acquisition (academic, social, emotional, and practical) is the primary measure of
educational progress and requires environments that are safe, inclusive, responsive, and
tailored to the diverse developmental profiles of learners.
Inclusive education: the design and delivery of education in ways that recognise,
accommodate, and value human diversity, ensuring that all children, regardless of ability,
background, or health status, can participate, progress, and achieve within the mainstream
system. Inclusion is not about "adding on" support for some; it is about embedding
flexibility, responsiveness, and equity at the core of educational practice and policy.
Educational assessment: refers to the ongoing process by which educators evaluate a
child's current level of development and learning, typically using both formative and
summative approaches. It is used to plan teaching, monitor progress, and identify learning
needs, and is central to the graduated approach ("assess, plan, do, review").
Clinical assessment: a specialist health service process used to diagnose
neurodevelopmental or medical conditions (e.g., autism, ADHD). It is conducted by trained
clinicians using validated tools and structured interviews. While diagnosis may support
access to certain medical or legal protections, it does not define educational need or
determine the exact nature of support a child requires in a school setting.
A needs-led system: one in which educational support is provided based on the specific,
observable learning needs of a child, not dependent on clinical diagnosis or categorisation.
It allows children to access timely, and appropriate help based on how they are functioning
in context, rather than waiting for confirmation of a medical condition or label.
41
References
[1]
M. Knapp et al., "The Economic Case for Prioritising Autism in Policy and Reform,"
London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE), Care Policy and Evaluation
Centre, London, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://www.lse.ac.uk/cpec/assets/documents/Autismeconomics.pdf
[2]
M. Warburton, M. L. Wood, K. Sohal, J. Wright, M. Mon-Williams, and A. L.
Atkinson, "Risk of not being in employment, education or training (NEET) in late
adolescence is signalled by school readiness measures at 4-5 years," BMC Public Health,
vol. 24, no. 1, p. 1375, 2024/05/22 2024, doi: 10.1186/s12889-024-18851-w.
[3]
M. L. Wood, L. Gunning, and M. Mon-Williams, "The relationship between 'school
readiness' and later persistent absenteeism," Royal Society Open Science, vol. 11, no. 6,
p. 240272, 2024, doi: doi: 10.1098/rsos.240272.
[4]
N8 Research Partnership, "A country that works for all children and young people:
An evidence-based plan for addressing the autism assessment and support crisis," 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://www.n8research.org.uk/research-focus/child-of-the-
north/reports
[5]
National Autistic Society, "Education Report," 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://dy55nndrxke1w.cloudfront.net/file/24/asDKIN9asAvgMtEas6glatOcB5H/NAS_Educ
ation%20Report%202023.pdf.
[6]
Ambitious about Autism, "Autism in education report," 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ambitiousaboutautism.org.uk/sites/default/files/reports/files/ambitious-about-
autism-autism-in-education-report-may-2025.pdf.
[7]
B. Wright et al., "Investigating the association between early years foundation stage
profile scores and subsequent diagnosis of an autism spectrum disorder: a retrospective
study of linked healthcare and education data," BMJ Paediatrics Open, vol. 3, no. 1, p.
e000483, 2019, doi: 10.1136/bmjpo-2019-000483.
[8]
M.L. Wood et al., "Potential for England's statutory school entry assessment to
identify special educational needs and reveal structural inequalities: a population-based
study," Archives of Disease in Childhood, vol. 109, no. 1, pp. 52-57, 2024, doi:
10.1136/archdischild-2023-325590.
[9]
A. L. Atkinson, U. Papen, M. L. Wood, and et.al, "A country that works for all
children and young people: An evidence-based plan for addressing the special educational
needs and disabilities (SEND) assessment and support crisis," 2024, doi:
https://doi.org/10.48785/100/268.
42
[10] T. Laverick and R. Baron, "Understanding Special Educational Needs and
Disabilities Assessment and Review Team experiences to improve and inform special
educational needs and disabilities systems in England," British Journal of Special
Education, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 479-490, 2024, doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-
8578.12555.
[11] K. Guldberg, Developing Excellence in Autism Practice: Making a Difference in
Education, 1st ed. London: Routledge, 2020.
[12] S. E. Connolly, H. L. Constable , and S. L. Mullally, "School distress and the school
attendance crisis: a story dominated by neurodivergence and unmet need," (in English),
Frontiers in Psychiatry, Original Research vol. Volume 14 - 2023, 2023-September-22
2023, doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1237052.
[13] K. Guldberg, S. Wallace, R. Bradley, P. Perepa, L. Ellis, and A. MacLeod,
"Investigation of the causes and implications of exclusion for autistic children and young
people," Genium, London, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.birmingham.ac.uk/documents/college-social-
sciences/education/reports/causes-and-implications-of-exclusion-for-autistic-children-and-
young-people.pdf
[14] A. John, Y. Friedmann, M. DelPozo-Banos, A. Frizzati, T. Ford, and A. Thapar,
"Association of school absence and exclusion with recorded neurodevelopmental
disorders, mental disorders, or self-harm: a nationwide, retrospective, electronic cohort
study of children and young people in Wales, UK," The Lancet Psychiatry, vol. 9, no. 1, pp.
23-34, 2022, doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(21)00367-9.
[15] C. Bond et al., "A country that works for all children and young people: An
evidence-based plan for improving school attendance," 2024, doi:
https://doi.org/10.48785/100/288.
[16] K. Guldberg et al., "Information obtained through verbal evidence sessions with
external partners," Annex B and Annex C, 2025.
[17] A. Hodges, R. Cordier, A. Joosten, H. Bourke-Taylor, and Y. W. Chen, "Evaluating
the feasibility, fidelity, and preliminary effectiveness of a school-based intervention to
improve the school participation and feelings of connectedness of elementary school
students on the autism spectrum," (in eng), PLoS One, vol. 17, no. 6, p. e0269098, 2022,
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0269098.
[18] M. A. Cullen et al., "Special Educational Needs in Mainstream Schools: Evidence
Review," Education Endowment Foundation, London, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED612232.pdf
43
[19] B. Wright et al., "Systematic approach to school-based assessments for autism
spectrum disorders to reduce inequalities: a feasibility study in 10 primary schools," BMJ
Open, vol. 11, no. 1, p. e041960, 2021, doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-041960.
[20] A. L. Atkinson et al., "Can holistic school readiness evaluations predict academic
achievement and special educational needs status? Evidence from the Early Years
Foundation Stage Profile," Learning and Instruction, vol. 77, p. 101537, 2022/02/01/2022,
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2021.101537.
[21] Embracing Complexity in Diagnosis, "Multi-Diagnostic Pathways for
Neurodevelopmental Conditions.," 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://www.gla.ac.uk/media/Media_862272_smxx.pdf
[22] Department for Education, "Arranging Alternative Provision: A Guide for Local
Authorities and Schools," 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/67a1ee367da1f1ac64e5fe2c/Arranging_Al
ernative Provision - A Guide for
[23] R. Wadman, O. Taylor, P. Qualter, N. Humphrey, and M. Wood, "A country that
works for all children and young people: Improving mental health and wellbeing with and
through education settings," 2024, doi: 10.48785/100/254.
[24] Y. Deng et al., "Family and Academic Stress and Their Impact on Students'
Depression Level and Academic Performance," Frontiers in Psychiatry, vol. Volume 13,
2022 2022, doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.869337.
[25] P. Perepa, S. Wallace, and K. Guldberg, "The experiences of marginalised families
with autistic children," The University of Birmingham, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.birmingham.ac.uk/documents/college-social-
sciences/education/publications/marginalised-families-with-autistic-children.pdf
[26] M. Mon-Williams, M. Wood, and et.al, "Addressing Education and Health Inequity:
Perspectives from the North of England," A report prepared for the Child of the North
APPG, 2023.
[27] R. A. I. Bethlehem et al., "Brain charts for the human lifespan," Nature, vol. 604, no.
7906, pp. 525-533, 2022/04/01 2022, doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-04554-y.
[28] F. W. Lindhout, F. M. Krienen, K. S. Pollard, and M. A. Lancaster, "A molecular and
cellular perspective on human brain evolution and tempo," Nature, vol. 630, no. 8017, pp.
596-608, 2024/06/01 2024, doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07521-x.
[29] A. E. Guyer, K. Pérez-Edgar, and E. A. Crone, "Opportunities for
Neurodevelopmental Plasticity From Infancy Through Early Adulthood," Child Dev, vol. 89,
no. 3, pp. 687-697, May 2018, doi: 10.1111/cdev.13073.
44
[30] S. Carozza, D. Akarca, and D. Astle, "The adaptive stochasticity hypothesis:
Modeling equifinality, multifinality, and adaptation to adversity," Proc Natl Acad Sci USA,
vol. 120, no. 42, p. e2307508120, Oct 17 2023, doi: 10.1073/pnas.2307508120.
[31] K. Honegger and B. de Bivort, "Stochasticity, individuality and behavior," Current
Biology, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. R8-R12, 2018/01/08/ 2018, doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.11.058.
[32] G. Vogt, "Stochastic developmental variation, an epigenetic source of phenotypic
diversity with far-reaching biological consequences," J Biosci, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 159-204,
Mar 2015, doi: 10.1007/s12038-015-9506-8.
[33] Department for Education. Special educational needs in England: Academic year
2024/25 [Online] Available: https://explore-education-statistics.service.gov.uk/find-
statistics/special-educational-needs-in-england/2024-25
[34] I. A. Apperly, R. Lee, S. W. van der Kleij, and R. T. Devine, "A transdiagnostic
approach to neurodiversity in a representative population sample: The N+ 4 model," JCPP
Advances, vol. 4, no. 2, p. e12219, 2024, doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/jcv2.12219
[35] F. Fotheringham, K. Cebula, S. Fletcher-Watson, S. Foley, and C. J. Crompton,
"Co-designing a neurodivergent student-led peer support programme for neurodivergent
young people in mainstream high schools," Neurodiversity, vol. 1, p. 27546330231205770,
2023, doi: 10.1177/27546330231205770.
[36] C. J. Crompton, F. Fotheringham, K. Cebula, C. Webber, S. Foley, and S. Fletcher-
Watson, "Neurodivergent-designed and neurodivergent-led peer support in school: A
feasibility and acceptability study of the neurodivergent peer support toolkit (NEST),"
Neurodiversity, vol. 2, p. 27546330241275248, 2024, doi: 10.1177/27546330241275248.
[37] E. Fisher, K. MacLennan, S. Mullally, and J. Rodgers, "Neuro-Normative Epistemic
Injustice Consequences for the UK Education Crisis and School Anxiety,"
Neurodiversity, vol. 3, p. 27546330251353565, 2025, doi: 10.1177/27546330251353565.
[38] Children's Commissioner, "Waiting times for assessment and support for autism,
ADHD and other neurodevelopmental conditions," 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://assets.childrenscommissioner.gov.uk/wpuploads/2024/10/CCo-report-on-ND-
waiting-times_final.pdf.
[39] C. Fielding, A. Streeter, D.M. Riby, and M. Hanley, "Neurodivergent Pupils'
Experiences of School Distress and Attendance Difficulties," Neurodiversity, vol. 3, p.
27546330251327056, 2025, doi: 10.1177/27546330251327056.
45
[40] R. Zahir et al., "Short report: Evaluation of wider community support for a
neurodiversity teaching programme designed using participatory methods," Autism, vol.
28, no. 6, pp. 1582-1590, Jun 2024, doi: 10.1177/13623613231211046.
[41] A. Morgan, D. Pendergast, R. Brown, and D. Heck, "Relational ways of being an
educator: trauma-informed practice supporting disenfranchised young people,"
International Journal of Inclusive Education, vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 1037-1051, 2015/10/03
2015, doi: 10.1080/13603116.2015.1035344.
[42] H. Korpershoek, E. T. Canrinus, M. Fokkens-Bruinsma, and H. de Boer, "The
relationships between school belonging and students' motivational, social-emotional,
behavioural, and academic outcomes in secondary education: a meta-analytic review,"
Research Papers in Education, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 641-680, 2020/11/01 2020, doi:
10.1080/02671522.2019.1615116.
[43] M.M. Leung-Gagné, Jennifer; Scott, Caitlin; Losen, Daniel J., "Pushed Out: Trends
and Disparities in Out-of-School Suspension," Learning Policy Institute, 2022.
[44] E. Rajotte et al., "A Neuroinclusive School Model: Focus on the School, Not on the
Child," Journal of Occupational Therapy, Schools, & Early Intervention, vol. 18, no. 2, pp.
281-299, 2025/04/03 2025, doi: 10.1080/19411243.2024.2341643.
[45] M.E. King-Sears et al., "Achievement of learners receiving UDL instruction: A
meta-analysis," Teaching and Teacher Education, vol. 122, p. 103956, 2023/02/01/2023,
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2022.103956.
[46] S. McGillicuddy, "Responding to challenging behaviour in post-primary schools:
Exploring a new authority," Social Sciences & Humanities Open, vol. 9, p. 100778,
2024/01/01/2024, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssaho.2023.100778
[47] S. Burtonshaw and E. Dorrell, "Listening to, and learning from, parents in the
attendance crisis," Public first, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.publicfirst.co.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2023/09/ATTENDANCE-REPORT-V02.pdf
46
© Crown copyright 2026
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0, except
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3.
Where we have identified any third-party copyright information, you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
About this publication:
enquiries www.gov.uk/contact-dfe
download www.gov.uk/government/publications
47
