4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
GOV
UK
Ofsted
Care Quality
Commission
Guidance
Thematic reviews of the SEND
local offer
Published 2 April 2026
Applies to England
Contents
Introduction
Purpose of the 2026 visits
Focus of the 2026 visits
Scope of the 2026 thematic visits
Themes of the 2026 thematic visits
The legal context
Composition of the team
Length and timing of thematic visits
Selection of local areas for thematic visits
Overview of visit activity
Information about the processes before, during and after the visits
Annex A: information request
htps://www.gov.uk/govement/publications/hematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-ofer/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-ofer
1/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
OGL
© Crown copyright 2026
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where
otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-
licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London
TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/thematic-reviews-
of-the-send-local-offer/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-offer
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-ocal-ofer/thematic-reviews-ofthe-send-local-ofel
2/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
Introduction
Ofsted and the Care Quality Commission (CQC) jointly inspect the
arrangements in local areas for children and young people with special
educational needs and/or disabilities (SEND).
As part of the area SEND framework, Ofsted and CQC complete a series of
thematic visits each year. The visits investigate a particular aspect of the
SEND system in depth, in a small number of areas.
We carried out thematic visits to investigate alternative provision
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/alternative-provision-in-local-areas-in-
england-a-thematic-review) in 2023, preparation for adulthood
(htps://www.gov.uk/government/publications/preparation-for-adulthood-
arrangements-in-local-areas-a-thematic-review) in 2024 and children with SEND
who are not in school(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-
experiences-of-children-with-send-who-are-not-in-school-a-thematic-review)in
2025.
This year, we will explore the SEND local offer. We will refer to this as 'the
local offer' throughout this guidance. The local offer is the provision
available across education, health and social care for children and young
people with SEND, and their families, in a local area. Information on the
local offer must be set out in one place. This is outlined in the SEND code of
practice, 2014 (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-code-of-practice-
0-to-25). The local offer has 2 key purposes:
to provide clear, comprehensive, accessible and up-to-date information
about the available provision and how to access it
to make provision more responsive to local needs and aspirations by
directly involving children and young people with SEND, their parents and
carers, and service providers, in its development and review
Purpose of the 2026 visits
We want to better understand:
how local area partnerships understand the needs of children and young
people with SEND in their area
how local area partnerships provide strategic oversight and deliver the
services outlined in the local offer
how parents, carers, children and young people are involved in
developing the local offer
https://wwwgov.u/government/ubications/thematic-revews-of-the-send-local-offer/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-cffel
3/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
the experiences of children and young people with SEND and their
families when accessing services in their local area
These visits will provide insights for Ofsted, CQC, national government,
strategic leaders and education, health and social care practitioners. They
will be used to promote improvement in the sector and update our approach
to inspection, as appropriate. Where we identify relevant insights on our
visits, we will share these with the Department for Education and the
Department of Health and Social Care to contribute to their policy
development.
We will not be forming outcomes about individual areas during these visits,
although we will summarise our findings in a national report. The national
report will list the local areas visited, but we will not attribute findings to
individual areas.
Focus of the 2026 visits
The local authority is responsible for publishing the local offer. However,
local authorities and their partner bodies and agencies, including health
services and education providers, must cooperate with each other in
developing and reviewing the local offer. These thematic visits will,
therefore, focus on how the local area partnership works together to identify
and respond to local needs accurately. This will include assessing how they
involve parents, carers, and children and young people in developing and
reviewing the local offer.
Inspectors will gather evidence from a range of stakeholders. They will seek
to understand the experiences of:
children and young people with SEND and their families, including those
who are receiving support from local SEND services
strategic partners, including:
those involved with developing and reviewing the local offer
those who commission, or support the commissioning of, services for
children and young people with SEND
delivery partners, including providers and practitioners across education,
health and social care who deliver the services outlined in the local offer
Scope of the 2026 thematic visits
tp/wwwgov.u/government/publications/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-offer/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-offel
4/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
Children and young people aged 0 to 25 with SEND are within the scope of
these visits. This includes those with an education, health and care (EHC)
plan or those receiving special educational needs (SEN) support.
Themes of the 2026 thematic visits
During the visits, we will explore 4 key themes:
How the local area partnership understands the needs
of children and young people with SEND in their local
area
Inspectors will explore:
how the local area partnership analyses the needs of children and young
people with SEND in their local area, including any joint strategic needs
assessment
how the local area partnership uses its information to develop and review
the local offer, in line with the SEND code of practice
how the local area partnership identifies children and young people's
needs early and accurately
The local area partnership's strategic oversight and
delivery of the services outlined in the local offer
Inspectors will explore:
how the local area partnership strategically plans for services that provide
support across education (including mainstream and specialist settings),
health and social care for children and young people with SEND in their
area
how the local area partnership jointly commissions services for children
and young people with SEND to provide universal, targeted and specialist
services across education, health and social care
whether practitioners are aware of the local offer and how they engage
with other local services
http://wwwo.uk/government/publications/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-offer/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-ofer
5/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
the involvement of education and health providers in developing services
that can meet children and young people's needs at the earliest
opportunity
how the local area partnership monitors the effectiveness of the local
offer and ensures that it adapts appropriately so it continues to have a
positive impact on children and young people with SEND and their
families
How parents, carers, children and young people are
involved in developing the local offer
Inspectors will explore:
how the local area partnership involves parents, carers, and children and
young people with SEND in the planning of the local offer and reviewing
of services
how the local area partnership engages with children and young people
with SEND to understand their needs, wishes and aspirations
how the local area partnership forms relationships with parents and
carers to develop services that meet the needs of local children, young
people and families
parents' and carers' confidence in the services available to meet their
child's needs
The experiences and outcomes of children and young
people with SEND and their families when accessing
services in their local area
Inspectors will explore:
the experiences of children and young people with SEND when they first
try to access support to meet their needs in their local area
whether the services outlined in the local offer have a positive impact on
children and young people with SEND
whether children and young people with SEND are aware of the services
outlined in the local offer and how to access them
whether children and young people with SEND can access universal,
targeted and specialist services that meet their needs in their local area
htp/wwwgov.uk/government/publications/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-offer/thematic-reviews-offhe-send-loca-ofe)
6/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
the availability of services in the community for children and young people
with SEND and whether these reflect children and young people's needs
and aspirations
To support our visits, we will request information from the local area
partnership and other agencies, as set out in Annex A. We do not expect
local area partnerships and other agencies to have all this information
available, or to produce this information solely for the purposes of the visit.
We expect them to provide only information that they already hold.
The legal context
Ofsted will carry out and lead these visits in response to a direction from the
Secretary of State for Education under section 118(2) of the Education and
Inspections Act 2006 (https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/40/section/118).
To fulfil any such request, and in relation to the activities in question,
sections 118(5) and (6) allow us to use existing powers of entry and
inspection of documents/powers to carry out an inspection under other
statutes, with any necessary modifications. These include section 20 of the
Children Act 2004 (https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2004/31/section/20) and
the Children Act 2004 (Joint Area Reviews) Regulations 2015
(https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2015/1792) (JAR Regulations).
CQC will assist Ofsted under paragraph 9(1) of schedule 4 of the Health
and Social Care Act 2008
(https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2008/14/schedule/4). If the visits involve
examining the provision of NHS care or CQC-regulated activities for
children and young people with SEND, CQC will provide the Secretary of
State for Health and Social Care with information and advice about this
care, as required by its commission under section 53(1) and (4) of the
Health and Social Care Act 2008
(https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2008/14/section/53). CQC will exercise
powers of entry and inspect documents as set out in sections 62 to 64 of the
Health and Social Care Act 2008
(https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2008/14/section/62).
Composition of the team
The team will usually be made up of 3 inspectors: 1 His Majesty's Inspector
(HMI) from education, 1 HMI from social care and a CQC children's services
inspector. The thematic visits are quality-assured by Ofsted and CQC.
Typically, quality assurance is carried out remotely.
https:/wwwgov.uk/government/publications/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-ocal-offer/thematic-reviews-ofthe-send-local-offel
7/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
Length and timing of thematic visits
Each visit will typically consist of up to 4 days of off-site activity and up to 4
days of on-site activity. The visits are planned to take place during 2026.
Inspectors will have the flexibility to reduce the number of off-site and/or on-
site days when appropriate, such as when we are visiting a smaller local
area with fewer children, young people and services.
Selection of local areas for thematic
visits
Ofsted and CQC will select a varied sample of local areas to visit. We will
be considerate of other inspection activity when selecting areas to visit.
Overview of visit activity
We are being commissioned by the Secretary of State for Education and the
Secretary of State for Health and Social Care to provide information and
advice about the development, review and impact of the local offer in local
areas in England. To provide this, inspectors will draw together information
from across education, health and social care services, as well as from
third-sector organisations, and from children and young people and their
families. We have set out the legal powers to request and view this
information above. We will share information about how we handle personal
data when we contact participants, including in notification letters.
The thematic visits will usually follow the structure set out below. The exact
timetable will be constructed jointly by the lead inspector and local area
leaders in consultation with colleagues in health and social care.
We may need to make adjustments to arrangements and timings, including
the notification call, if there is a public holiday during this time.
The survey referred to in the Activities in week 1 section will gather
stakeholders' views in relation to the local offer. The survey will go live on
the notification day, 10 days before the on-site visit begins, and will remain
live until midday on the eighth working day from the notification day.
https:/wwwgov.uk/goverment/publications/hematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-ofer/thenatic-reviews-of-the-send-local-ofe/
8/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
Activities in week 1 (10 days before the on-site
fieldwork)
Activities include:
inspectors notify local leaders of the visit 10 working days before the on-
site fieldwork begins
inspectors share a link to the survey for local area leaders to distribute
inspectors and local leaders hold a set-up discussion (this is carried out
remotely by video call)
inspectors request information from the local area and a sample of other
partners to support the visit (this information is set out in Annex A of this
guidance)
local area leaders make reasonable efforts to distribute the survey to
relevant stakeholders (this should typically include all education providers
in the partnership and key stakeholder groups in education, health and
social care)
the local partnership and other partners share information to support the
visit
inspectors carry out off-site planning and pre-visit analysis
inspectors select individual children and young people for tracking and
meetings
inspectors select a sample of providers to visit
Activities in week 2 (5 days before the on-site
fieldwork)
Activities include:
local area partners provide further information for tracking meetings
inspectors work with local leaders to agree a timetable
a local area nominated representative arranges the visits and meetings
inspectors begin off-site evidence-gathering
https:/www.gov.uk/govement/publications/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-offer/thematic-reviews-ofthe-send-local-ofe,
9/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
Activities in week 3
Activities include:
inspectors conduct on-site evidence-gathering
inspectors provide local area leaders with regular feedback
Information about the processes before,
during and after the visits
Ofsted and CQC inspectors will review relevant information held by the
inspectorates about the local offer in the local area.
Week 1: notification, set-up discussion, information
request and analysis
Notification
Ten working days before on-site evidence-gathering, inspectors will contact
the relevant leaders in the local area to notify them of the visit.
Ofsted will contact the director of children's services (DCS)
CQC will notify the chief executive of the integrated care board (ICB)
The lead inspector will work with the DCS to nominate a representative -
the local area nominated officer (LANO) - who will act as a single point of
contact throughout the visit. The LANO will act on behalf of those involved
in developing and reviewing the local offer in the local area, linking with the
identified ICB representative.
The LANO and the ICB representative will liaise with the lead inspector
throughout the visit, so that activities can be coordinated effectively.
Ofsted and CQC will only defer the visit to a local area in exceptional
circumstances. If a local area has a concern about the timing of a visit, it
may submit a deferral request in line with the principles set out in Ofsted's
deferral policy (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/deferring-ofsted-inspections).
Set-up discussion
htp://wwwovu/govement/ublications/hematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-ofer/theatic-eviews-ofthe-send-ocal-ofe/
10/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
Once the visit has been confirmed, the lead inspector and the CQC
inspector will make an extended telephone call to the LANO and the ICB
representative. The lead inspector will make it clear that the LANO and the
ICB representative are encouraged to have someone present during the call
to assist and support them if they wish. This should be at least one other
senior leader who typically deputises for them and can understand and
discuss the content of the call.
The purpose of this call is to:
check on leaders' wellbeing and determine whether steps need to be
taken to make sure that any issues or concerns are addressed and that
appropriate support is available; the lead inspector should ascertain how
to contact those responsible for leaders' wellbeing on a day-to-day basis,
so that they can pass on concerns about their wellbeing when appropriate
and necessary
discuss any important contextual factors in the local area that inspectors
should be aware of
discuss the arrangements for the visit, including a proposed timetable of
activities; arrangements for talking to children, young people and families;
the key officers and representatives to involve in specific meetings; and
the purpose of proposed activities
agree that there will be regular discussions to confirm the main messages
gathered in evidence and to check arrangements for the day
discuss the arrangements for distributing the surveys; the lead inspector
will coordinate with the LANO to ensure the widest distribution of the
surveys, which should capture the experiences of as many children and
young people as possible
discuss the information requested for the visit (see Annex A)
ask that the key stakeholders involved in developing, reviewing and
delivering the services outlined in the local offer are made aware of the
visit, including providers, parents and carers
Survey arrangements
We will make the links to the surveys available for gathering stakeholders'
views about the local offer. The surveys will go live on the day when local
leaders are notified of the visit and will remain live until midday on the eighth
working day after the notification day. The LANO will be responsible for
distributing the survey to local stakeholders. Local networks, including the
parent carer forum (PCF), may help to distribute the survey to stakeholders.
During the visits, the lead inspector will work with the LANO to ensure that -
as far as possible - the surveys are made available to:
all children and young people with SEND aged 11 to 25
htps://wwwovu/ovement/ublications/hematc-reviews-of-the-send-local-ofer/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-ocal-ofer
11/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
parents and carers of children and young people with SEND
all settings and services that are involved the development, review and
delivery of services outlined in the local offer in the local area
Inspectors will work with those distributing the surveys to consider
accessibility issues, including making paper copies available on request.
We will use the evidence we collect through surveys primarily to inform our
final national report. We will not attribute findings to any specific area. We
will also review survey responses periodically. If we identify any
safeguarding concerns through this, we will respond as set out in the
significant concerns section.
Off-site analysis
Inspectors will review the information requested from the local area and
other partners, which is listed in Annex A.
Week 1, Monday
Inspectors will request the information set out in Annex A.
Week 1, Thursday, by 5pm
The local area will provide:
pseudonymised person-level data to assist inspectors in selecting
children and young people to track
a list of education, health and social care providers and settings to assist
inspectors in selecting the providers that will have sampling visits
the requested information about children and young people with SEND
Week 1, Friday, by 5pm
Inspectors will select the children and young people whose cases will be
tracked. They will select providers, services and settings for meetings and
visits.
Preparing for evidence-gathering activity
Inspectors will arrange with the LANO and the ICB representative to meet
with those involved in area-wide strategic planning. The meeting is to
understand the local area's context for developing the local offer, and will
take place at the end of week 2.
Selection of children and young people for tracking meetings
During week 1, inspectors will select approximately 3 children and young
people to be the focus of tracking meetings. These are meetings with
children, young people and their parents or carers, if appropriate, and the
practitioners directly involved with them. The meetings are for inspectors to
hear directly about children and young people's experiences and outcomes,
including those working with multiple agencies, such as children in care
and/or those with health needs.
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/thematic-reviews-ofthe-send-local-offer/thematic-reviews-offhe-send-loca-offer
12/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
When selecting the children to track, inspectors will consider information
shared by local area leaders, the demographic make-up of the local area,
including protected characteristics
(https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/15/part/2/chapter/1 defined by the
Equality Act 2010, and any contextual issues specific to the local area.
Once children and young people have been selected, the LANO will:
arrange for a practitioner who knows the child or young person well to
approach them, if appropriate, and their parents or carers, to discuss their
involvement in tracking meetings
share any further information about the child or young person that may be
relevant
arrange tracking meetings with children, young people and their parents
and carers
arrange a multi-disciplinary tracking meeting with the practitioners who
are/have been directly involved with the child or young person - this can
include practitioners across education, health and social care and any
third-sector involvement
Selection of providers for sampling visits
During week 1, inspectors will select a number of providers to visit, to
review the experiences of a wider group of children and young people.
When choosing providers to visit, inspectors will consider those who deliver
the services outlined in the local offer.
These sampling visits enable inspectors to gather information about the
impact of the local area's arrangements on a wider group of children and
young people. Inspectors will seek to understand children's and young
people's experiences and outcomes by talking to practitioners and
reviewing documents. While we may include our observations from the visit
in the national report to be published at the end of the thematic visits, we
will not use the information gathered to make judgements about individual
local areas or individual providers.
The lead HMI will provide the LANO with notification letters to send to the
chosen providers. Inspectors will identify the settings they want to visit
based on the information provided by the local area partnership (see Annex
A). The LANO and the identified ICB representative will make the necessary
arrangements for inspectors to visit the settings, or for practitioners from the
settings to meet with inspectors.
Week 2: off-site analysis, creating an on-site timetable,
tracking meetings and remote evidence-gathering
htps/wwwgov.u/government/publications/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-offer/thematic-reviews-ofthe-send-local-ofef
13/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
begin
Creating the timetable
The Ofsted lead inspector will coordinate the creation of a timetable for
gathering evidence off site in week 2, and on site in week 3. They will work
jointly with the CQC inspector and social care inspector to create the
timetable, in collaboration with the LANO and the ICB representative. This
process will include arrangements for meetings with practitioners and
leaders to discuss their work, and with children, young people and their
parents or carers to discuss their experiences. Inspectors will also arrange
keeping-in-touch meetings and a debrief at the end of the week to share
visit findings.
When creating the timetable, the Ofsted lead inspector and CQC lead
inspector will:
consider which activities should be carried out in person, and which
should be carried out by phone or remotely by video call
include enough time for inspectors to travel between appointments
include time for inspectors to review and analyse the information
gathered, individually and together
ensure that the timetable is flexible enough to be changed in response to
emerging findings, if required
work with the LANO and the ICB representative to ensure that local
leaders and practitioners are aware of the timetable and any changes to it
Inspectors will meet during week 2 to confirm the plan for the visit and
discuss any final arrangements with the LANO and the ICB representative.
Meetings to discuss local strategic planning
Inspectors will have discussions with those involved in area-wide strategic
planning for the development and review of the local offer, including those
who have been involved in:
developing and/or overseeing plans
communicating strategic plans with the local area
incorporating strategic planning into performance measures
Inspectors will also want to understand how local strategic planning is
having an impact on the work of managers and frontline practitioners and
supporting children, young people and their families directly.
These discussions may include any of the following who have been involved
in the strategic development of the local offer and the commissioning of
services for children and young people with SEND:
htp://wwwo.u/goverment/publications/thematic-revewsof-the-send-local-ofer/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-ocal-ofe
14/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
representatives from the local authority, including education and social
care
representatives from health
representatives from the third sector
children and young people with SEND and their families
Discussions with parents and carer groups
Inspectors will meet remotely with parents and carers who have agreed to
participate, to:
understand their experiences
understand the impact of the services outlined in the local offer on their
experiences and outcomes
understand how services in the local area engage with parents and
carers and the impact of this engagement
identify any common themes that inspectors may wish to explore further
during visits
Additionally, inspectors will meet with parents and carers as part of tracking
meetings. They may also arrange to meet with or talk to other parents and
carers to discuss relevant themes and their individual experiences, or to
seek their views on a specific aspect of the local offer.
Tracking meetings with children, young people, parents and carers
Inspectors will use tracking meetings to gather information about the impact
of the local strategy and commissioning of services for children and young
people with SEND and their parents or carers. Tracking meetings enable
inspectors to understand children and young people's experiences and to
determine whether services outlined in the local offer meet their needs and
aspirations well. Inspectors will consider how decisions have been made,
how children, young people and their families have been involved, and the
extent to which the needs of children and young people have been met.
Tracking meetings will help inspectors to establish themes they wish to
explore through further on-site activity. The information provided by the local
area and other partners, and from meetings with leaders, practitioners,
parents and carers, and groups of children and young people, will also feed
into the themes that inspectors choose to explore further during on-site
activity. This further on-site activity may include meetings with stakeholders
and sampling the education, health and social care experiences of more
children and young people with a range of needs and across a range of
ages.
Inspectors will discuss the child or young person's experiences, the support
available to them, and the professionals involved in providing that
support. They will ask the LANO to work with practitioners and families to
https:/wwwgov.uk/goverment/publications/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-ocal-offer/thematic-reviews-ofthe-send-local-ofel
15/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
understand how inspectors can best support the child or young person to
share their experiences. Inspectors may also discuss the child or young
person's experiences with their parents and/or carers, either with or
separately from their child or young person, depending on the age of the
child or young person and the family's preferences.
Week 2, Monday, by 5pm
The lead inspector will ask the LANO to coordinate information-sharing with
the inspection team about the children and young people who are being
tracked. We do not expect local areas to provide exhaustive information, but
information should include, where available:
a chronology of significant events relating to the education, health and
social care of the child or young person
a pen portrait of the child or young person, including information about
their needs, aspirations and support
Inspectors will ask for further information, including:
the most recent assessment information
the most recent plans, including an EHC plan, annual review, a personal
education plan or a pathway/care plan, where relevant
commissioning arrangements for universal, targeted and specialist
services received by the child or young person
Week 3: tracking meetings, sampling visits and
discussions
Multi-agency tracking meetings with practitioners
Inspectors will have a multi-agency discussion with education, health and
social care professionals who work with the child or young person. The lead
inspector will ask the LANO and the ICB representative to ensure that the
professionals involved in the discussion include staff who have the greatest
awareness of the child or young person.
Inspectors may discuss a child or young person's records with practitioners,
using their knowledge of the child or young person, file structure and
recording systems. They may also consider any case supervision notes.
Where case records are held wholly or partly electronically, the service
htps://www.gov.u/goverment/publications/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-offer/thematic-reviews-offhe-send-local-offel
16/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
should arrange for identified inspectors to have secure access to the
electronic system.
Inspectors will base their findings on recent information that affects the child
or young person's current situation. However, inspectors may ask for
historical information to help them understand the child or young person's
journey through the SEND system.
Sampling meetings
Inspectors will have sampling meetings with education, health and social
care professionals.
Inspectors will discuss the partnership's strategy for the development,
review and delivery of services outlined in the local offer and ask questions
to better understand the impact on children and young people with SEND.
Inspectors will also review records relating to children and young people to
identify enabling factors and barriers.
Sampling visits to providers and services
During sampling visits, inspectors will meet with or visit a specific provider
or service and ask for information about children and young people's
experiences.
The settings that inspectors choose to visit or meet with may include, but
are not limited to, educational settings, primary care services and targeted
early help services.
Inspectors will choose the children and young people to speak to during
sampling visits, where this is possible. These may include children and
young people who have a specific need, who are receiving a specific
service and/or who are at a particular point in their care or education.
Inspectors may choose the children and young people before the visit, using
the information provided by local area partners. Alternatively, they may ask
practitioners to show them records based on certain criteria established
from emerging themes and choose the children and young people to
discuss accordingly. Inspectors may or may not invite children and young
people to meet with them during the sampling visit.
Inspectors will look at any other relevant documents relating to the children
and young people. They will discuss their experiences and outcomes with
the practitioners in that provision or service and/or those who are directly
involved in the commissioning, decision-making and oversight of the
provision and support. Inspectors may also look at children and young
people's records and supervision notes. Where children and young people's
records are held wholly or partly electronically, the provider should arrange
for the inspectors to have secure access to the electronic system.
htt:/wwwo.ugoverment/ublicatons/hematc-reviews-of-the-send-ocal-ofer/thematic-reviews-ofthe-send-ocal-ofer
17/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
Findings will be based on contemporary practice and on practice that has
an impact on the child or young person's current situation. However,
inspectors may ask for historical information to help them understand the
child or young person's journey through the SEND system.
Discussions with leaders and practitioners who support children and
young people with SEND
Inspectors will hold meetings with leaders and frontline practitioners working
with children and young people with SEND. They will want to understand
the provision and services available.
Visit inspector team meetings
The team will meet at different points during the visit, either remotely or in
person. In particular, the team should, as far as is practicable, meet each
day to discuss and record observations and ensure that the lead inspector
has the most recent information to reflect on with the LANO and the ICB
representative.
During the final team meeting, inspectors will discuss what they observed
and what they were told, in preparation for a summary conversation with
local area leaders.
Regular discussions
At the heart of our visits is a professional dialogue between inspectors and
leaders. Regular discussions will enable the inspection team to share their
observations with the DCS, the ICB representative and the LANO, identify
any additional information required, answer any questions, and make
changes to the timetable if necessary.
Inspectors may work with the LANO and the ICB representative to arrange
additional meetings with leaders and/or practitioners throughout the on-site
visit. This will enable inspectors to further explore emerging themes
identified through tracking meetings or sampling visits.
Debrief with local area leaders
We will share our observations with local area leaders verbally during the
visit, at appropriate points, and at the end of a visit during a debrief meeting.
The debrief meeting with local area leaders will include a summary of
observations and reflective discussion.
The lead inspector will liaise with the DCS and the ICB representative,
through the LANO, to agree who attends this meeting. This may include
local area leaders involved in commissioning and overseeing services
outlined in the local offer.
Additional attendees may attend at the discretion of the lead inspector.
After the visit
htps://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-offer/thematic-reviews-ofthe-send-loca-ofer
18/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
We will not make or report outcomes about local areas based on evidence
gathered during the visit.
Summary note
Following the visit, the local authority will receive a summary note with a
record of the activities carried out (example summary note
(https://gov.uk/government/publications/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-ofer).
The note will not be evaluative, and there will be no outcomes or
recommendations.
Reporting
Ofsted and CQC will share the observations from these visits in a single
national report. The national report will list the local areas visited. We will
not attribute findings to individual areas.
Significant concerns
Inspectors should follow the principles set out in Safeguarding concerns:
guidance for inspectors (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ofsted-
safeguarding-policy/safeguarding-concerns-guidance-for-inspectors) If they are
concerned about a child or young person, they should follow existing
procedures (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ofsted-safeguarding-
policy/ofsted-safeguarding-policy).
If inspectors remain concerned, Ofsted and/or CQC will consider whether it
is appropriate to take further action. This could include, if appropriate,
inspectors referring individual children's or young people's cases to the local
authority or requesting an inspection of the individual service or provider in
line with Ofsted's or CQC's statutory and regulatory duties and powers.
If inspectors identify other serious concerns, they will also notify a senior
officer from the local partnership as soon as possible. Ofsted and CQC will
consider this information, and it may lead to further activity, including
inspection.
Conduct and complaints
During the visit, inspectors will need to speak to a range of people. They will
do so in line with our code of conduct, and act at all times with
https://wwwgov.u/government/publications/hematic-reviews-of-the-send-ocal-ofer/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-ofer
19/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
professionalism, courtesy, empathy and respect. Inspectors should take
careful account of the wellbeing of leaders and staff and adjust their
approach or activity, as appropriate, as they go about their work during the
visit. If inspectors see or suspect that a staff member (including a leader) is
upset or distressed at any point during the visit, inspectors should respond
sensitively. Where appropriate, inspectors will consider suitable adjustments
to enable the staff member to continue. Where appropriate, inspectors will
inform those responsible for the person's wellbeing. The lead inspector
should contact the duty desk to discuss what action to take. There may be
exceptional occasions where a pause to the visit may seem necessary. We
will consider these on a case-by-case basis.
The great majority of our work is carried out smoothly and without incident.
If concerns do arise during the visit, they should be raised with the lead
inspector as soon as possible in order to resolve issues before the visit is
completed. Any concerns raised, and actions taken, will be recorded in the
evidence collected during the visits. If an issue remains unresolved, the
local area partnership can contact a senior Ofsted leader the working day
after the visit using the number provided at notification.
If it is not possible to resolve concerns during the visit, through a phone call
the working day after the visit, or through submitting comments in response
to the draft summary note, the local area partnership may wish to lodge a
formal complaint on receiving the final summary note. The lead inspector
will ensure that the local area is informed that it is able to make a formal
complaint, and that information about how to complain
(https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted/about/complaints-procedure)
is available on GOV.UK.
Annex A: information request
The Secretary of State for Education and the Secretary of State for Health
and Social Care have commissioned Ofsted and CQC to provide
information and advice about the development and review of the local offer
and how local area partnerships deliver services outlined in the local offer.
To provide this information and advice, inspectors will draw together
information from across education, health and social care services, as well
as from third-sector organisations and children, young people and their
families. We have set out the legal powers to request and view this
information above. We will share information about how we handle personal
data when we contact participants.
Annex A sets out the information inspectors will request for sharing
information. Inspectors will provide details about accessing an online
system, which local area leaders can use to share the information.
htps//www.gov.u/goverment/publications/hematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-ofer/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-ofer
20/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
The information that inspectors will request includes the following.
Pseudonymised person-level data
Pseudonymised person-level data of children and young people with SEND,
aged between 0 and 25 will be provided in Excel format. Inspectors will use
this data to select the children and young people whose experiences they
will evaluate as part of case tracking. This data should include:
their age
their gender
their ethnicity
any special educational needs and/or disabilities
any health or social care involvement
whether they have an EHC plan, or have had one previously, or are in the
process of assessment
whether they are looked after
all educational setting(s) they are attending and have attended previously
whether these settings are state maintained, independent, or
unregistered
whether these settings are in/out of area (include journey times in case of
the latter)
How the local area partnership understands the needs
of children and young people with SEND and
strategically plans for services
Inspectors will consider:
information on the local area partnership's analysis of the local needs of
SEND including the current joint strategic needs assessment that informs
the local offer
information on the planning strategies for children and young people with
SEND, including any self-evaluations and action plans resulting from
internal and external reviews
a list of all children and young people aged 0 to 25 on the dynamic
support register
https://wwwgov.uk/government/publications/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-ofer/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-ofer
21/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
findings from the partnership's analysis of outcomes data on preparation
for adulthood for children and young people with SEND, including
strengths, challenges and actions taken
information on the education, health and care partners in the local area
partnership involved in developing and reviewing the local offer
information on the governance arrangements, decision-making
structures, how partners work together and who is responsible for
delivering what aspects of the local offer
information on the structure of the local health services, which includes
who commissions the service and who provides the service - we provide
an (optional) health commissioning template
(https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/area-send-framework-and-
handbook.) for this
information on the local area partnership's systems and processes
related to the EHC plan request for assessment
information on the development, oversight and quality assurance of EHC
plans, including the services involved, and on the assurance framework
for EHC plans
the numbers of children and young people with SEND who are:
not attending an educational setting, including those who receive home
education
attending alternative provision
known to youth justice services
eligible to receive adult care services
on part-time timetables for their education
Information on education provision
Inspectors will consider:
information on the local education system including the types of
educational setting, and which settings have specialist provision available
information about the placements of children and young people in
residential special schools; data on the number of children and young
people in residential special schools, and the reasons for this
information about educational settings outside the local area that provide
education for the area's children and young people with EHC plans; data
on the number of children and young people with SEND who are placed
out of area, and the reasons for this
htt:wwwvovemetpublications/theatic-reviws-of-the-send-ocaoffer/thematic-reviews-of-the-sendlocal-ofel
22/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
the most recent evaluation of educational attendance of children and
young people with SEND in the local area and any supporting action plan
information about the strategy for transporting children and young people
with SEND to their provision, including activities, short breaks and health
appointments (where relevant)
data about destinations after leaving school, including data about young
people not in education, employment or training, and employment data
for 18- to 25-year-olds with SEND
information about the needs of children and young people in alternative
provision and the local authority's strategy and commissioning
arrangements for alternative provision, including how they monitor the
future need for placements and maintain sufficient provision
data about children and young people who have EHC plans, or are in
alternative provision on part-time timetables; this should include the
numbers of children and the length of time they have been in alternative
provision
information about the alternative provision settings used by the local
authority, and the children or young people who attend them, including
whether these are part-time placements
a summary of the local authority's quality assurance process for
alternative provision, including unregistered provision
Information on social care provision
Inspectors will consider:
information on social care services:
organisational structure showing lines of reporting and accountability
details of any services in the area that have been commissioned for
children and young people with SEND, including from the community,
the voluntary sector and the local offer (including early help such as
family hub type services)
the local authority short-break statement, and information on the current
provision and uptake
information on the thresholds/criteria for providing services and
assessments for children and young people with SEND, at different levels
of need; this should include information on services for early help
information on the arrangements for transition for children and young
people with SEND and how adult social care services are provided to 18-
to 25-year-olds
htps/wwwgov.uk/government/publications/thematic-reviews-of-the-send-local-offer/thematic-reviews-offhe-send-local-ofe)
23/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
Health provision
Inspectors will consider:
performance data from the previous 12 months (including current waiting
times) on delivery of the healthy child programme and therapy services
(including speech and language therapy, occupational therapy,
physiotherapy, newborn hearing, audiology, dietetics, child and
adolescent community mental health services, neurodiversity assessment
and community paediatricians for children and young people aged 0 to 19
years and 19 to 25, if available
pathways for referrals to health services for assessment, as set out in
'performance data' above
Further information
Inspectors may also request information from other agencies that are
involved in providing support or commissioning services for children and
young people with SEND, such as health and social care services or
educational settings.
Inspectors will gather any personal information, including sensitive personal
data, necessary to help them evaluate the impact of the local offer.
Inspectors may, at any time, ask for additional information not set out in
Annex A and may agree to look at additional information that agencies
provide.
Any additional information must:
be necessary for an accurate understanding of children and young
people's experiences and outcomes in relation to the scope of the visit
not already be available through the request in Annex A
We do not necessarily expect local areas and other partners to have all the
information set out in Annex A available. If the local area or any other
partner does not hold the information listed in Annex A, they should not
produce new documents solely to meet the request for information. Instead,
partners should share all the information they have that is relevant to this
request. Inspectors will want only the most recent information that relates to
the scope of the visit. Inspectors will not review information if they believe it
falls outside the scope of the visit.
tp/wov.ugovenment/publications/hematic-reviews-of-the-send-localoffer/thematic-reviewsof-the-send-oca-ofe
24/25
4/5/26, 4:17 PM
Thematic reviews of the SEND local offer - GOV.UK
If information that is relevant to more than one of the requests is shared, it
does not need to be replicated in each section, but the lead inspector
should be made aware of it.
Inspectors may not be able to review all the information provided by the
local area. If this is the case, inspectors will select the information they
judge to be most relevant to the purposes of the visit.
When local area partners share the lists, they should indicate the date(s)
that the data in each list refers to, as far as possible.
If certain data is unavailable, the lead inspector may wish to discuss how
the local area monitors those areas.
OGL
DIEUET
MON DROIT
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
© Crown copyright
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/thematic-reviews-ofthe-send-localoffer/thematio-reviews-ofthe-send-local-offer
25/25
