Department
for Education
Universal SEND
Services process and
impact evaluation
January 2026
Authors: CFE Research
Government
Social Research
Contents
List of figures
4
List of tables
7
Glossary
8
Executive summary
10
Evaluation aims and objectives
10
Key findings
12
Progress towards the programme's objectives
15
Introduction
17
Universal SEND Services
19
About the evaluation
20
Chapter 2: Programme reach
26
Profile of individuals engaged in USS
26
Chapter 3: Engagement in USS
32
How delegates first heard about USS
32
Motivations to engage in USS
32
Profile of activity engagement
34
Usefulness of USS to inform teaching and support practice
39
Chapter 4: Effectiveness of delivery
41
USS content
41
Engagement in other CPD provision
48
Sharing learning from USS
49
Chapter 5: Impact on delegates
52
Increased knowledge about how SEND can affect engagement in learning
52
Increased confidence
62
Job satisfaction
65
Chapter 6: Impact on educational settings
67
Changes made across settings
67
Perceived impact of setting-level changes
76
Chapter 7: Impact on children and young people
82
2
Student belonging, and enjoyment and engagement in school or college life
82
Teacher and student relationships
83
Student motivation and engagement in learning
84
Student behaviour
86
Peer-to-peer relationships
88
Attainment and attendance
89
Chapter 7: Conclusion
91
Is USS well-designed, targeted and delivered?
92
Does USS work to improve teaching practice?
92
Are more children and young people with SEND having their needs met, and have their
outcomes improved since USS was rolled out?
93
Areas for consideration
94
Appendix 1: Evaluation methodology
95
Approach
95
Appendix 2: Theory of change step-by-step
100
Appendix 2: Theory of change diagram
103
Appendix 3: Activities offered
104
Appendix 4: Data tables
105
3
List of figures
Figure 1: Survey respondents' motivations for taking part in USS (n=696)
33
Figure 2: Proportion of survey respondents that engaged in USS activities (n=1,654) 35
Figure 3: Number of USS activities survey respondents engaged in, by setting
36
Figure 4: Number of USS activities survey respondents engaged in, by role
37
Figure 5: Number of USS activities survey respondents engaged in, by year of first
engagement
38
Figure 6: Survey respondents' ratings of usefulness of USS activities to inform teaching
and support practice
40
Figure 7: Survey respondents' perceptions about content of USS.
41
Figure 8: Survey respondents' perceptions about communication, facilitation and the
accessibility of USS
44
Figure 9: Reasons why survey respondents are unlikely to engage with USS activities in
the future (n=32)
46
Figure 10: Who learning and insight from USS has been shared with (n=1,511)
50
Figure 11: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Engaging in the
USS has increased my knowledge about how different SEND can affect the ways in
which children and young people engage with their learning' (n=1,025)
52
Figure 12: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Engaging in the
USS has increased my knowledge about the ways in which different SEND can
affect children and young people physically, socially and emotionally' (n=1,031) 54
Figure 13: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Engaging in the
USS has increased my knowledge about the different types of SEND' (n=1,016) 56
Figure 14: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Engaging in the
USS has given me the skills to adapt my teaching practice in response to the needs
of children and young people with SEND' (n=909)
57
Figure 15: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Engaging in the
USS has enhanced my leadership skills' (n=851)
61
Figure 16: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Engaging in the
USS has increased my confidence to identify the needs of children and young
people with SEND' (n=990)
63
4
Figure 17: Survey respondents' level of agreement that their engagement with USS has
increased their confidence levels to liaise with other professionals and
parents/carers of children and young people with SEND
64
Figure 18: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Engaging in the
USS has increased my job satisfaction' (n=935)
65
Figure 19: The degree to which survey respondents' school/college/trust has made
changes to teaching practice, informed by learning and insight from USS (n=647) 67
Figure 20: The degree to which survey respondents' school/college/trust has made
changes to the way in which children and young people are supported at key
transition points, informed by learning and insight from USS (n=616)
69
Figure 21: The degree to which survey respondents' school/college/trust has made
changes to pastoral support, informed by learning and insight from USS (n=595) 72
Figure 22: The degree to which survey respondents' school/college/trust has made
changes to processes for identifying SEND needs among children and young
people, informed by learning and insight from USS (n=636)
73
Figure 23: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Because of USS,
within my school/college/trust the needs of children and young people with SEND
are being identified earlier' (n=809)
73
Figure 24: The degree to which survey respondents' school/college/trust have made
changes to the way that staff liaise with parents and carers of children and young
people with SEND, informed by learning and insight from USS (n=616)
74
Figure 25: The degree to which survey respondents' school/college/trust has made
changes to SEND policy, informed by learning and insight from USS (n=623)
75
Figure 26: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Because of USS,
within my school/college/trust the needs of children and young people with SEND
are a higher priority' (n=853)
77
Figure 27: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Because of USS,
within my school/college/trust there is increased capability to respond to the needs
of children and young people with SEND' (n=881)
78
Figure 28: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Because of USS,
within my school/college/trust there is a more inclusive culture and ethos' (n=850)79
Figure 29: Teacher survey respondents' level of agreement that adaptions to teaching
and support practice informed by USS have improved the following outcomes for
children and young people in their school/college/trust
82
5
Figure 30: Teacher survey respondents' level of agreement that adaptions to teaching
and support practice informed by USS have improved teacher and student
relationships for children and young people in their school/college/trust (n=738)
83
Figure 31: Teacher survey respondents' level of agreement that adaptions to teaching
and support practice informed by USS have improved the following outcomes for
children and young people in their school/college/trust
85
Figure 32: Teacher survey respondents' level of agreement that adaptions to teaching
and support practice informed by USS have improved behaviour for children and
young people in their school/college/trust (n=713)
87
Figure 33: Teacher survey respondents' level of agreement that adaptions to teaching
and support practice informed by USS have improved peer-to-peer relationships for
children and young people in their school/college/trust (n=675)
88
Figure 34: Teacher survey respondents' level of agreement that adaptions to teaching
and support practice informed by USS have improved the following outcomes for
children and young people in their school/college/trust
89
6
List of tables
Table 1: Number of individuals engaged, by provider
26
Table 2: Number of individuals engaged, by academic year
27
Table 3: Number of individuals engaged, by English region
27
Table 4: Number of individuals engaged, by setting
28
Table 5: Number of individuals engaged, by role
29
Table 6: Number of individuals engaged, by activity type.
29
Table 7: Number of individuals engaged, by role and provider.
30
Table 8: Number of individuals as a proportion of activity type, split by role
31
Table 9: Most common activity combinations
39
Table 10: Breakdown of survey responses by fieldwork period
97
Table 11: Correspondence of activity type categories between MI and survey data.
104
Table 12: Survey respondents' educational setting
105
Table 13: Survey respondents' role
105
Table 14: Survey respondents' academic year of engagement in USS
106
Table 15: Survey respondents' number of years in role
106
Table 16: Whether survey respondents have additional responsibilities
106
Table 17: Survey respondents' number of activities engaged in
107
7
Glossary
ADHD
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
AET
Autism Education Trust
AP
Alternative provision
CPD
Continuing professional development
DfE
Department for Education
Diarists
People who contributed to the research by writing reflective diaries
ECT
Early career teacher
EEF
Education Endowment Foundation
EHC plan
Education, Health and Care plan
ETF
Education and Training Foundation
EYP
Early years practitioner
FE
Further education
INSET
In-service training
Interviewees
People who contributed to the research by taking part in interviews
MI
Management information - data provided by the organisations that are
the subject of the evaluation
nasen
National Association for Special Educational Needs
NASENCO
National Award for Special Educational Needs Coordination
NPQ
National Professional Qualification
Respondents
People who contributed to the research by answering surveys
SEMH
Social, emotional and mental health
SEN
Special educational needs
SENCo
Special educational needs coordinator
SEND
Special educational needs and disabilities
SLT
Senior leadership team
Support staff
In this report, the term includes learning support assistants, higher
level teaching assistants and pastoral support
8
TA
Teaching assistant
Teachers
Classroom teachers, including EYPs and tutors
USS
Universal SEND Services
WSS
Whole School SEND
9
Executive summary
Universal SEND Services (USS) is a programme of training and continuous professional
development (CPD) in England and is funded by DfE until 2026. Up until March 2025,
USS was delivered through the Whole School SEND (WSS) consortium led by the
National Association for Special Educational Needs (nasen), in partnership with the
Educational and Training Foundation (ETF), the Autism Education Trust (AET) and other
delivery partners in the education community.¹ The programme provides school and
college staff with free, flexible training and resources designed to fit around school and
college life. A series of 20 Online CPD Units, developed in partnership with sector
specialists with a focus on special educational needs and disabilities (SEND), form the
backbone of the programme - together with Specialist Spotlight Sessions, live Webinars,
interactive and downloadable Toolkits, and regional networking and support. USS
therefore offers a diverse menu of CPD and training that responds to the education
sector's needs, and with content appropriate for staff at all levels and educational
settings.
USS aimed to develop the skills and knowledge of the mainstream school and further
education (FE) workforce, so that the needs of more children and young people with
SEND were identified earlier and met effectively. The training programme also sought to
drive change in attitudes and approaches to SEND across mainstream settings and
encourage the development of more inclusive cultures that would better serve the needs
of children and young people with SEND. Achievement of these objectives was intended
to enhance the learning experience of children and young people with SEND, and lead to
improved outcomes - including wellbeing, attendance, behaviour and attainments in the
short-to-medium term, and successful transitions and sustainable employment in the long
term.
Evaluation aims and objectives
The aims and objectives of USS were outlined in a theory of change (see Appendix 2).
This provided the framework for the theory-based evaluation, which explored the
effectiveness of USS, the extent to which it was achieving its objectives in the short term,
and progress towards its intended outcomes and impacts in the longer term.
The evaluation focused on the period from the programme's launch in 2022 until the end
of March 2025, and had 2 main objectives:
1 From 1 April 2025, the programme is delivered by nasen in partnership with the ETF. AET is no longer
part of the consortium. New Autism Training - a combination of Train the Trainer and Online Units - will be
launched for the academic year 2025/2026.
10
to assess how, and to what extent, USS has resulted in improved quality of
mainstream provision of support for children and young people with SEND
to assess how, and to what extent, USS has resulted in improved outcomes for
children and young people with SEND
To achieve these objectives and test the programme's theory of change, CFE Research
implemented a mixed-methods approach, which addressed the following key research
questions:
1. How did the mainstream school and college workforce engage with USS?
2. Is the USS well-designed, targeted and delivered?
3. Does USS work to improve teaching practice?
4. Are more children and young people with SEND having their needs identified and met
earlier in mainstream settings?
5. Have outcomes improved for children with SEND since USS was rolled out?
Evidence about the reach of USS and the characteristics of those who engaged in the
programme was explored, through an analysis of management information (MI) for the
period spanning the academic years 2021/2022 to 2024/2025.
A survey of programme delegates² was administered in order to capture views and
experiences of USS, and perceived outcomes and impacts on individual practice,
education settings' approaches to supporting children and young people with SEND, and
pupils' outcomes. The survey was administered on 3 occasions between January 2024
and April 2025, to achieve maximum coverage. A total of 1,660 usable responses were
received, which represented less than 1% of individuals who engaged in the programme
during this period, according to the MI.
To understand how USS supported individuals and the education workforce, 7 case
studies were undertaken, involving a total of 17 in-depth interviews with delegates and
wider staff within primary, secondary and sixth form/FE settings. A further 5 individual
interviews were carried out with delegates from secondary settings, to ensure there was
equivalent coverage across all key phases. In addition, 34 delegates across all
mainstream settings completed reflective diaries over a 6-week period, to document how
they applied USS learning in their roles.
Although the characteristics of survey respondents do not reflect the total population in
the MI - with special educational needs coordinators (SENCos), support staff and
leaders overrepresented, and those in teaching roles underrepresented - the survey
data, triangulated with findings from the qualitative research and MI, provides insights on
2 The term 'delegates' is used throughout to refer to individuals who engaged with USS.
11
how USS has supported the professional development of the education workforce, and
shaped policy and practice in a range of settings.
Key findings
Programme reach
Since April 2022, approximately 255,207 individuals in a range of roles and settings
have engaged in USS. Most have participated in AET provision (94%) (which is
delivered across all phases), followed by nasen (5%) (targeting schools), and ETF
(1%) (targeting sixth form/FE colleges).
The number of individuals who engaged in the programme has increased year on
year, aside from the 2024/2025 academic year when it reduced.
Coverage has been achieved across all English regions, with the highest level of
engagement in Yorkshire and the Humber, and the lowest in the North East.
Engagement and usefulness of USS
Survey respondents were most likely to have heard about USS from either a work
colleague in their setting (33%) or directly through nasen, AET or ETF (33%).
The most common motivations for survey respondents to engage in USS were to help
keep up to date with the latest thinking on SEND (66%) and to plug knowledge gaps
(51%).
Survey respondents were most likely to have engaged in 1 activity (38%), while
around one-fifth participated in 3 (19%) or 4 or more activities (20%). Those in senior
positions engaged in more activities than those in support roles.
Most respondents, irrespective of the activity they engaged in and their role, found
them useful. The downloadable resources, ETF's College SEND Provider Review,
and nasen's Peer Mentoring Support for School Leaders, were perceived as the most
useful.
Effectiveness of design and delivery
Most survey respondents (83%) rated the support they received through the USS
programme as excellent or good, and nearly all respondents (95%) reported that they
were likely or very likely to engage with USS activities in the future.
The majority of respondents agreed or strongly agreed that the content of USS was
appropriate to their position/role (85%), while a similar proportion (83%) agreed the
content was appropriate to their setting.
12
Delegates particularly valued the case studies and practical elements of USS.
Printable resources supported delegates to cascade and implement learning at their
setting.
Less than one-third (29%) of survey respondents had engaged in other CPD that was
not part of USS. Of those who engaged in other provision, most (78%) perceived the
quality to be comparable to USS.
Most survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that communication from the
training provider was clear (92%), facilitators were knowledgeable and engaging
(91%), and they were able to access the activities at a convenient time (86%).
Improved communication and promotion of USS would help to ensure more delegates
were fully informed about the suite of high-quality resources available.
Most (90%) respondents have shared the learning and insight gained through USS
with at least 1 other individual or group of staff within their setting. A lack of time was
the main barrier to sharing insight.
Impact on delegates
Individuals who engaged in 4 or more activities tended to find USS more impactful
than those who had participated in 1 or 2 activities.
Over three-quarters (77%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that USS
increased their knowledge about how different SEND can affect the ways in which
children and young people engage with their learning, and how different SEND can
affect children and young people physically, socially and emotionally.
More than two-thirds of survey respondents (70%) agreed or strongly agreed that
USS increased their knowledge about the different types of SEND, and 78% felt that it
equipped them with the skills to adapt their teaching practice in response to the needs
of children and young people with SEND.
Most survey respondents (89%) reported that to some or a large extent they have
drawn on the learning from USS to adapt their teaching and support practice.
Nearly two-thirds (65%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that USS
supported them to enhance their leadership skills.
Three-quarters (75%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that
engagement in USS increased their confidence in identifying the needs of children
and young people with SEND. A similar proportion agreed USS had a positive impact
on their confidence in liaising with parents or carers (71%) and other professionals
(75%).
Over three-fifths (62%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that USS
increased their job satisfaction.
13
Impact on educational settings
Almost three-fifths of survey respondents (57%) indicated that their setting had made
changes to its SEND policy by drawing on the learning from USS.
Two-thirds of survey respondents (66%) reported that their setting had made at least
some changes to its processes for identifying SEND needs, including the ways in
which staff liaise with parents and carers of children and young people with SEND.
Three-fifths (60%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that as a result of
engaging with USS, the needs of children and young people with SEND in their
setting were being identified earlier.
Around two-thirds of respondents agreed or strongly agreed that the needs of children
and young people with SEND were a higher priority (65%), and that there was
increased capability to respond within their setting (66%), as a result of their
engagement with USS.
Most survey respondents (87%) reported that their setting had made changes to
teaching practice, informed by learning and insight from USS.
Around three-quarters of respondents indicated that their setting had made changes
to the ways in which children and young people are supported at key transition points
(73%), and changes to their pastoral support (70%), informed by learning from USS.
Around two-thirds of survey respondents (67%) agreed or strongly agreed that due to
USS, there was a more inclusive culture and ethos in their setting.
Impact on children and young people
Changes in outcomes for children and young people take time to occur, and measuring
these was beyond the scope of this evaluation. However, there was evidence, based on
staff perceptions, that adaptations to teaching and support practices, informed by
learning and insight from USS, were starting to have a positive effect on pupils:
nearly three-quarters (72%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that
teacher and student relationships within their setting had improved
over three-fifths of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that children and
young people's sense of belonging (66%), motivation (61%), engagement in learning
(61%) and enjoyment of school/college (60%) had increased
over half of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that behaviour (56%), peer
to peer relationships (56%), and children and young people's engagement in wider
school/college life (54%) had improved
around half of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that attainment (54%)
and attendance (50%) had improved
14
Progress towards the programme's objectives
USS has delivered a valuable, well-designed CPD offer that addresses gaps in the SEND
training landscape. There is strong evidence, in line with the theory of change, that the
programme has made a positive contribution towards the first of its core objectives: to
enable staff across educational settings to improve the quality of mainstream provision to
support children and young people with SEND. Quality has been enhanced by
improvements in staff's knowledge of SEND, and their skills and confidence to identify
and respond to SEND needs - including by adapting teaching and support practice.
However, while respondents reported that the knowledge, skills and confidence gained
through USS contributed to improved job satisfaction, there was no evidence that this
had resulted in better staff retention. Wider evidence suggests that this is more
influenced by other factors such as pay and terms and conditions, than by engagement in
CPD and training.
The majority of delegates did not fulfil strategic roles within their schools, and most drew
on 1 or 2 USS activities to address specific gaps in their knowledge and skills. Although
many reported sharing the learning with their peers, this was primarily with a view to
ensuring a consistent approach to supporting individual pupils or groups with similar
needs, rather than to embed inclusive approaches designed to meet the needs of all
pupils. Consequently, evidence that USS has affected change at a whole-setting level, at
scale, across the sector, is more limited. In settings where change at this level has
occurred, those in strategic roles were likely to have engaged in USS and disseminated
the insight to others in positions to drive the implementation of new approaches. Although
there is some evidence of changes to policies and processes for identifying SEND needs,
most changes were associated with teaching and support practice.
The vast majority of survey respondents reported improvements in their knowledge, skills
and confidence to identify and respond to the needs of children and young people with
SEND; however, in a substantial minority of schools, respondents did not perceive that
more pupils were having their needs identified and met earlier. Furthermore, it is not
certain that USS has achieved its second objective: to improve outcomes for pupils with
SEND based on the current evaluation evidence. Changes in both of these outcomes are
likely to take longer to emerge, as new policies, processes and practices becomes fully
embedded within settings. Nevertheless, the evaluation has identified examples that
illustrate progress is being made - particularly in relation to individuals' sense of
belonging, motivation, engagement in learning, and enjoyment of education. These are
all important prerequisites for improvements in other outcomes, such as attainment, in
the longer term - which suggests that USS can make an important contribution.
15
Areas for consideration
Based on insight from this evaluation, the impact of USS on mainstream support for, and
the outcomes of, children and young people with SEND could be maximised by:
greater engagement by strategic leaders with the power to implement change at the
whole-setting level
clearer branding and improved signposting to introductory, intermediate and
advanced content, to ensure training is matched to individuals' existing level of
knowledge and skills, the requirements of their role, and/or current challenges within
their setting
enhancing the content of the training to include more practical, context-specific
examples and interactive elements
supporting individuals to draw on the range of training and resources available
through USS, in order to develop a coherent programme of CPD which sustains their
engagement, in line with the DfE standards for teachers' professional development
collecting and sharing examples of effective whole-school change and evidence of
impact on pupil outcomes
16
Introduction
The 2022 SEND Review³ recognised that the SEND and alternative provision (AP)
system was failing to deliver for children and young people with special educational
needs and disabilities (SEND) and their families. The review identified 3 central
challenges: improving the experience for parents and families; ensuring financial
sustainability; and achieving better outcomes for children and young people. The SEND
and AP Improvement Plan⁴ (published under the previous government) set out proposals
to create a more efficient, inclusive system - including through the introduction of
national standards, improved transition support, clearer accountability, and a revised
funding model. The plan also recognised that workforce development and effective
leadership were critical mechanisms for equipping mainstream schools and further
education (FE) colleges to provide high-quality, timely support for all learners with SEND.
Early intervention and stronger parental trust were central to the plan's vision.
Independent analysis of consultation responses to the SEND Review⁵ highlighted that
there was general support for a national SEND and AP system that was underpinned by
SEND training for different professions, including teaching staff.
The number of pupils requiring support for SEND has been steadily rising, from 1.5
million in 2022⁶ to over 1.7 million in 2025.⁷ The proportion of pupils with SEND who
require an Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan has also increased from 2.8% in 2017
to 5.3% in 2025.⁷
Despite early intervention and stronger parental trust being central to the SEND and AP
Improvement Plan, a recent National Audit Office (NAO) report found that families'
confidence in the SEND system remained low, with many reporting inconsistent provision
3 Department for Education and Department of Health and Social Care (2022) SEND Review: Right
support, right place, right time. London: HM Government. Available at:
https://assets.pubishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1063620
/SEND_review_right_support_right_place_right_time_accessible.pdf
4 HM Government (2023) Special Educational Needs and Disabilities (SEND) and Alternative Provision
(AP) Improvement Plan. Right Support, Right Place, Right time.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-and-alternative-provision-improvement-plan
5 Sinclair, F. and Zaidi, A. (2023) Independent analysis of the consultation responses to the SEND review:
Right support, right place, right time. Department for Education. Available at:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-review-right-support-right-place-right-time
6 Department for Education (DfE) (2022) Special educational needs in England: Academic year 2021/22.
[online] Explore Education Statistics. Available at: https://explore-education-statistics.service.gov.uk/find-
statistics/special-educational-needs-in-england/2021-22
7 Department for Education (2025) Special educational needs in England: January 2025. [online]
Department for Education. Available at: https://explore-education-statistics.service.gov.uk/find-
statistics/special-educational-needs-in-england/2024 to 2025
17
and delays in receiving specialist support.⁸ A 2023 study found that two-fifths of
parents/carers (38%) were not confident in the school's ability to support their child.⁹ The
NAO report recommended that whole-system reform and progress towards inclusive
education was required, to increase parental confidence that their children's needs could
be identified and met.
Positively, staff confidence in supporting children and young people with SEND appears
to have improved in recent years. According to the 2022 School and College omnibus,
less than three-fifths of teachers (57%) felt equipped to support pupils with SEND. 10 More
recent data indicated that around three-quarters of primary (78%) and secondary setting
staff (76%) were fairly or very confident that they could meet the needs of pupils with
SEND (with and without an EHC plan). 11
Foundational SEND training is provided as part of general teacher training and is guided
by the Initial Teacher Training and Early Career Framework (ITTECF). 12 This framework
outlines the core learning expected during teacher training and the first 3 years of a
teacher's professional development, including content on adaptive teaching and
strategies for supporting pupils with SEND. DfE introduced a new mandatory National
Professional Qualification (NPQ) for special educational needs coordinators (SENCos) in
2024, replacing the National Award for Special Educational Needs Coordination
(NASENCO). This new qualification ensures that current and aspiring SENCos receive
consistent, high-quality training to improve SEND outcomes for pupils - by equipping
them with leadership skills and a strong understanding of SEND legislation and
supporting them to champion inclusive school cultures. 13 SENCos without the NASENCO
qualification must complete the NPQ SENCo within 3 years of appointment. In addition to
foundational training, internal training, input from SENCos and peer support are the most
common sources of support that teachers draw upon to meet the needs of children and
8 National Audit Office (2024) Support for children and young people with special educational needs.
[online] National Audit Office. Available at: https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/support-for-
children-and-young-people-with-special-educational-needs-summary.pdf
9 Department for Education (2023) Parent, pupil and learner panel: 2022 to 2023 - February wave. [pdf]
Department for Education. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/parent-pupil-and-
learner-panel-2022-to-2023-february-wave
10 IFF Research (2022) School and College Panel - February 2022 wave. Department for Education.
Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications
11 Department for Education (2025) School and College Voice: January 2025. London: Department for
Education. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/school-and-college-voice-omnibus-
surveys-for-2024-to-2025/school-and-college-voice-january-2025
12 Department for Education (2024) Initial Teacher Training and Early Career Framework. London: Crown
Copyright. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/initial-teacher-training-and-early-
career-framework
13 Department for Education (2023) Transition to national professional qualification for special educational
needs co-ordinators. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/mandatory-qualification-for
sencos/transition-to-national-professional-qualification-for-special-educational-needs-co-ordinatorg
18
young people with SEND in their setting. 14 SEND-specific continuing professional
development (CPD) is integral to improving teaching quality as well as effective support
for pupils. However, a lack of time, cost, and perceptions of poor efficacy often mean that
SEND-related CPD is not always prioritised. 15
Effective CPD requires partnership working between leadership, teachers and training
providers. The DfE standards for teachers' professional development stipulate the
conditions for effective partnerships, which include: a focus on improving and evaluating
pupil outcomes; ensuring CPD is underpinned by robust evidence and expertise; is
collaborative and involves expert challenge; and is sustained over time. 16
The Whole School SEND (WSS) programme was launched in 2019 to provide
accessible, high-quality, evidence-based information, resources and CPD, to support the
development of more inclusive approaches. Universal SEND Services (USS) superseded
WSS in 2022 and was one of a number of DfE programmes¹⁷ included in the SEND and
AP Improvement Plan. 18
Universal SEND Services
DfE is funding USS until 2026. USS draws on evidence-based research to address to
some of challenges in the system identified in the SEND Review, through: (i) the
provision of training and resources designed to strengthen the mainstream education
workforce's ability to identify and respond to the needs of children and young people with
SEND earlier and more effectively; (ii) valuing parents' and pupils' voices in shaping
policy and practice within schools and colleges; and (iii) driving changes in attitudes and
approaches to SEND, and encouraging more inclusive cultures across whole settings
and within sector leadership. The overarching aim of the programme is to improve the
learning experience of children and young people with SEND, leading to more successful
transitions and improved lifetime outcomes, including sustainable employment.
14 IFF Research (2023) School and College Panel - June 2023. Department for Education. Available at:
htt:/www.gov.uk/government/publications/school-and-college-panel-omnibus-surveys-for-2022-to-2023.
15 Wall, K., Van Herwegen, J., Shaw, A., Russell, A. and Roberts, A. (2019) A study of the drivers, demand
and supply for special educational needs and/or disabilities (SEND) - Related continuing professional
development (CPD) for school staff. Available at:
https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/id/eprint/10082917/7/PDF4%20-20Drivers%20Demands620and%20Supply.pdf
16 Department for Education (2016) Standard for teachers' professional development. Available at:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5a819db8ed915d74e6233385/160712__PD_standard.pd
17 Other programmes included Autism in Schools and Partnerships for Inclusion of Neurodiversity in
Schools (PINS)
18 HM Government (2023) Special Educational Needs and Disabilities (SEND) and Alternative Provision
(AP) Improvement Plan. Right Support, Right Place, Right time.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/send-and-alternative-provision-improvement-plan
19
Until March 2025, USS was delivered through the WSS consortium led by the National
Association for Special Educational Needs (nasen), in partnership with the Education and
Training Foundation (ETF), the Autism Education Trust (AET), and other delivery
partners in the education community.¹⁹ The programme provides free, flexible training
and resources designed to fit around school and college life, and tailored to the needs of
staff at all levels working in different educational settings. A series of 20 online SEND
CPD units, developed in partnership with sector specialists, forms the backbone of the
programme, which also offers Specialist Spotlight Sessions, Live Webinars, interactive
and downloadable toolkits, and regional networking and support.
To maximise engagement in the programme, USS has been promoted through a range
of channels, including its website²⁰, delivery partners' electronic newsletters, and social
media. Although participation is voluntary, delegates²¹ are required to register their
interest in activities that are relevant to their role, area of interest or training need. USS
has been delivered alongside and complements other national CPD programmes such as
Autism in Schools²² and Partnerships for Inclusion of Neurodiversity in Schools (PINS),²³
which share similar aims of improving outcomes for children and young people with
SEND.
About the evaluation
DfE commissioned CFE Research to deliver a theory-based process and impact
evaluation of the USS programme, with 2 main objectives:
to assess how, and to what extent, USS has resulted in improved quality of
mainstream provision of support for children and young people with SEND
to assess how, and to what extent, USS has resulted in improved outcomes for
children and young people with SEND
To achieve its objectives, the evaluation addressed the following research questions:
1. How did the mainstream school and college workforce engage with USS?
19 From 1 April 2025, the programme is delivered by nasen in partnership with the ETF, with AET no longer
part of the consortium. New Autism Training - a combination of Train the Trainer and Online Units - will be
launched as part of the fourth year of USS for the academic year 2025/2026.
20 The USS website can be found here: tps://www.wholeschoolsend.org.uk/page/universal-send-services
21 The term 'delegates' is used throughout to refer to individuals who engaged with USS.
22 More about the Autism in Schools programme can be found here: https://www.local.gov.uk/case-
studies/autism-schools
23 More about the PINS programme can be found here:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/partnerships-for-inclusion-of-neurodiversity-in-schools-
pins/partnerships-for-inclusion-of-neurodiversity-in-schools-pins-programme
20
2. Is the USS well-designed, targeted and delivered?
3. Does USS work to improve teaching practice?
4. Are more children and young people with SEND having their needs identified and met
earlier in mainstream settings?
5. Have outcomes improved for children with SEND since USS was rolled out?
Approach
The anticipated outcomes and impacts of USS for delegates, education settings and
pupils were summarised in a theory of change (Appendix 2). In the absence of a suitable
comparator or control group to establish the causal effects of USS, the evaluation tested
the assumptions of this theory by addressing the key research questions and capturing
the programme's self-reported contribution to the short-term outcomes achieved, as well
as emerging impacts. An indicator bank was developed containing the metrics against
which changes in the anticipated outcomes could be measured. Together with the theory
of change, this provided the framework for the evaluation and informed the design of the
data collection tools.
A mixed-method approach was adopted for the evaluation, involving primary research
with delegates and other stakeholders, and secondary data analysis, as summarised
below:
Management information (MI)
nasen, AET and ETF collected MI for the time period spanning the academic years
2021/2022 and 2024/2025, to understand the level of engagement and reach of the
programme. 24 MI included data fields on delegates' roles, settings, geographical
locations, and the type(s) of training they engaged in. The original intention was to use
the MI to create a sampling frame for the delegate survey (see below), and to link this
data to the survey responses for the purposes of the impact evaluation. However, it was
not possible for delivery partners to share data at the individual level. This meant that the
MI and survey data were analysed separately. Pseudonymised variables were provided
to enable the number of individuals who engaged in USS to be calculated.
nasen, ETF and AET provided separate MI datasets on activity engagements that took
place between April 2022 and March 2025. CFE merged these datasets and analysed
the data to assess the programme's reach. In the absence of a unique identifier, it was
not possible to remove duplicates from the merged dataset, to identify individuals who
participated in activities delivered by different delivery partners. This meant that it was
also not possible to analyse the combinations of activities delegates participated in, using
24 The MI data does not include data from other providers of USS training (i.e., University of Derby or Sea
View Trust).
21
the MI. The survey provided the opportunity to explore the combinations of activities
delegates engaged in; however, it is important to note that this represents only a small
subsample of all delegates.
The USS activities in the MI were coded to reflect those utilised within the delegate
survey (see Appendix 3 for further details).²⁵
AET provided data in 2 formats:
aggregate counts of delegates at each training session, including data fields on
session date as well as region
individual delegate data collected via feedback forms, including fields on setting and
role. This data represented around 50% of the aggregate counts
When reporting MI results for AET, aggregate counts have been used to provide
programme reach (e.g., overall number of individuals and provider, as well as geographic
reach). Individual delegate data was used to understand delegate characteristics (e.g.,
delegate setting and role).
Including the AET aggregate counts, 255,207 individuals engaged in the programme.
Survey of programme delegates
The survey was designed to capture delegates' views and experiences of USS, and their
perception of impacts on individual practice, education settings' approaches to supporting
children and young people with SEND, and pupil outcomes, in line with the theory of
change. The survey was disseminated at 3 time points to maximise the response rate:
On-programme (process) and impact survey (January 2024 to March 2024):
Disseminated to delegates who first participated in the programme between April
2022 and July 2023, to explore experiences of USS and perceived impacts (n=519).
Delegates that had participated in USS for the first time in the 2023/2024 academic
year were asked about their experiences of USS only (n=154).
On-programme (process) survey only (September 2024 to October 2024): This
captured perceptions from additional delegates who had engaged in the programme
since January 2024 (n=256), to explore their experiences of USS. This survey did not
explore perceived impacts of USS.
On-programme (process) and impact survey (February 2025 to April 2025):
Disseminated to all delegates who had engaged in the programme since April 2022,
25 The MI does not include any data relating to the following activities included in the survey: Peer
Mentoring Support for School Leaders (nasen), downloadable resources (nasen), Action Research
(University of Derby), Lesson Study (University of Derby) and Big Idea for SEND (Sea View Trust).
22
to capture insight from additional delegates who had engaged in the training, and their
perceptions about its impact (n=731) since October 2024.
While the survey addressed most questions to all respondents, it asked those in
leadership positions specifically about the changes made within their wider setting (e.g.,
to their SEND policy).
A total of 1,660 usable responses were received, which represents less than 1% of
individuals who engaged in programme, based on the MI. Survey respondents consisted
of delegates from a range of settings, including primary (n=642; 39%), secondary school
(n=334; 20%), and sixth form/FE college (n=311; 19%). Respondents were most likely to
be SENCos (n=465; 28%), followed by those in support roles (n=442; 27%) and
leadership roles (n=378; 23%). A smaller proportion had teaching roles (n=252; 15%),
and a minority were from other roles (n=123; 7%). 26 A full breakdown of respondents'
characteristics can be found in Table 12 to 17Table 17 in Appendix 4.
The characteristics of survey respondents did not reflect those of the total population in
the MI, as there were key differences between the samples in terms of setting and role.
For example, the survey sample included more respondents in leadership and SENCo
positions, while the MI included more individuals in teaching and support roles. This and
other limitations of the evaluation are explored further below.
Differences in survey outcomes by respondent characteristics²⁷ were explored using
column proportion tests (z-test) to test for statistical significance. Only findings that were
statistically significant at the 5% level or below are reported, where the sample was equal
to or greater than 30. Any minor differences in percentages provided in the charts and
main text were due to rounding. To improve readability and accessibility, percentages
below 5% have been removed from stacked bar charts and multi-category visualisations.
Qualitative fieldwork
In line with the theory of change, the qualitative fieldwork sought to understand how USS
helped the education workforce to:
acquire the knowledge, skills and confidence to effectively identify and respond to the
needs of children and young people with SEND
drive change in attitudes and approaches to SEND at the whole-setting level, to foster
more inclusive cultures
26 Examples of those in other roles include consultants, as well as those who work for local authorities.
27 Characteristics included in the column proportion tests include educational setting, respondent role, no.
of USS activities engaged in (dosage), year first engaged in the programme, and proportion of CYP in a
setting with special educational needs (SEN) or an EHC plan.
23
adapt teaching and support practice, and the extent to which these changes resulted
in perceived improvements in the outcomes of children and young people
This was achieved through:
In-depth case study interviews with 17 USS delegates and wider staff in 7 settings:
3 primary schools, 1 secondary school, and 3 sixth form/FE colleges. A further 5
interviews with delegates from secondary schools, to ensure equivalent coverage
across all settings.
Reflective diaries completed by 34 delegates in 2 early years, 14 primary, 10
secondary, 7 sixth form/FE college settings and 1 all-through school. Delegates
completed reflective diaries over a 6-week period, to document up to 3 weekly
examples of how they applied USS learning in their roles. Diarists were also asked to
reflect on any enablers or barriers they experienced while implementing their training,
as well as any perceived outcomes for themselves, their wider setting, or children and
young people.
Within this report, the terms 'interviewees' and 'diarists' distinguish between insights from
the different strands of the qualitative research. References are made within examples to
specific USS activities where possible. Where it is not possible to identify a specific
activity, the term 'USS training' has been used.
Evaluation limitations
The MI and survey datasets were analysed separately as it was not possible to link them.
It is important to note that the characteristics of survey respondents do not reflect the
total population in the MI, and some significant differences were found including:
more individuals in the MI were from primary (57%) and early years (9%) settings
than in the survey (41%; 6%)
more survey respondents were from secondary (20%) and sixth form/FE colleges
(19%) than in the MI (16%; 4%)
more survey respondents were from leadership (23%) or SENCo (28%) roles than in
the MI (4%; 7%)
more individuals in the MI were from teaching (42%) and support (36%) roles than in
the survey (15%; 27%)
Although all roles are represented in the survey sample, it is skewed towards individuals
in leadership and SENCo roles, which is not the case in the MI; this could be due to
teachers having less time to engage in the evaluation. Given the overrepresentation of
these groups in the survey, caution is advised when interpreting the results.
24
Furthermore, the proportion of individuals within the MI who engaged with AET activities
is higher than in the survey. This difference is likely to be due to the fact that survey
invitations were not distributed to AET delegates directly, but via local authorities.
25
Chapter 2: Programme reach
Effectively engaging a diverse range of staff is a prerequisite for achieving USS's
objectives, as set out in the theory of change. To understand the extent to which the
programme reached its target audience, this chapter presents MI data on the number
and characteristics of staff who engaged in the different elements of the programme
between 1 April 2022 and 31 March 2025.
Profile of individuals engaged in USS
From 1 April 2022 to 31 March 2025, 255,207 individuals engaged in USS. Most
engaged in AET provision (which targeted all phases of education), 28 followed by nasen
(targeting schools) and ETF (targeting FE) provision (Table 1). MI indicated that
individuals participated in 2.5 activities on average, with the number of activities engaged
in per individual ranging from 1 to 43.
Table 1: Number of individuals engaged, by provider
Provider
No.
%
AET
239,718
94%
ETF
3,820
1%
nasen
11,672
5%
Total
255,207
100%
Source: MI data
The number of individuals who engaged in the programme increased year on year from
2021/2022 to 2023/2024 (Table 2).²⁹ However, in 2024/2025, this number reduced by
38%, compared with 2023/2024.
28 AET figures are based on aggregate counts for each training session. They do not reflect the total
numbers of individuals partaking in the training.
2⁹The number of individuals within Table 2 (n=253,297) differs from the total number of individuals within
the MI data (n=255,207) due to missing or inconsistent data on year of engagement.
26
Table 2: Number of individuals engaged, by academic year
Academic year
No.
%
2021/2022
18,551
7%
2022/2023
81,048
32%
2023/2024
94,797
37%
2024/2025
58,902
23%
Total
253,297
100%
Source: MI data
The programme has achieved coverage across all English regions. Yorkshire and the
Humber had the highest level of engagement, with the least engagement in the North
East (Table 3) - a region that does not have fewer schools or colleges than others. The
reasons for lower take-up warrant further investigation, to help increase future
engagement.
Table 3: Number of individuals engaged, by English region
Region
No.
%
Yorkshire & the Humber
46,003
18%
East Midlands
40,553
16%
South East
31,338
12%
London
30,949
12%
West Midlands
29,490
12%
North West
23,688
9%
South West
23,251
9%
East of England
19,767
8%
North East
9,838
4%
Total
254,877
100%
Source: MI data
27
Delegate characteristics
Setting
Individuals who engaged with USS were from a range of settings³⁰ (Table 4). Over half
(53%) were staff working in primary settings, followed by secondary settings (15%) and
early years (9%). Those in other roles included staff from specialist settings. 31
Table 4: Number of individuals engaged, by setting
Setting
No.
%
Early years
12,501
9%
Primary
75,545
53%
Secondary
21,712
15%
All-through school
367
0%
Sixth form/FE college
5,820
4%
Other setting
25,385
18%
Total
141,330
100%
Source: MI data
Role
The individuals most likely to engage in the programme occupied roles in teaching (42%)
or support³² (36%) (Table 5). 33 Staff in SENCo and leadership roles accounted for 7%
and 4% of all engagement respectively. Over one-in-ten individuals (11%) held other
positions, including roles not in education. 34
30 The number of individuals in Table 3 (n=141,330) differs from the total number of individuals within the
MI data (n=143,515) due to missing or inconsistent data regarding role information.
31 The MI data includes AET figures based on individual delegate data, which represents around 50% of
the total number of individuals within AET training sessions.
32 Support roles include positions such as teaching assistants, administrative staff, technicians, and other
staff.
33 The number of individuals in the table (n=143,448) differs from the total number of individuals within the
MI data (n=143,515) due to missing or inconsistent data regarding role information.
34 Those from other roles include both staff who work within (e.g., technical staff) and outside (e.g.,
consultant) educational settings.
28
Table 5: Number of individuals engaged, by role
Role
No.
%
Leadership
6,454
4%
SENCo
9,876
7%
Teaching
60,837
42%
Support
51,109
36%
Other
15,162
11%
Total
143,438
100%
Source: MI data
Activity types
Most individuals who participated in the USS programme engaged in the AET Autism
Training (89%), followed by nasen Online Units (5%) and ETF SEND Events (2%) (Table
6). This reflects the number of individuals who engaged with each provider.
Table 6: Number of individuals engaged, by activity type
Activity
No.
%
AET Autism Training
128,023
89%
nasen Online Units
6,609
5%
ETF SEND Events
3,035
2%
nasen Live Discussions
2,626
2%
nasen Responsive Webinars
1,476
1%
nasen PD Groups
743
1%
ETF Community of Practice
716
0%
nasen Preparation for Adulthood
218
0%
ETF College SEND Review
69
0%
Total
143,515
100%
Source: MI data
29
Engagement by provider and role
The way individuals engaged with each provider differed according to their role.
According to the MI data, nearly half (45%) of those who engaged with AET activities
were in teaching roles, with over one-third in support (36%) roles. Nearly two-fifths (38%)
of those who accessed nasen activities were in support roles; a further fifth (21%) were in
teaching positions. For ETF activities, nearly two-fifths (36%) of delegates were in
leadership positions, a third (33%) were in teaching roles, and a quarter (26%) were in
support roles (Table 7).
Table 7: Number of individuals engaged, by role and provider
Provider
AET (n)
AET (%)
ETF (n)
ETF (%)
nasen (n)
nasen (%)
Leadership
3,886
3%
1,375
36%
1,194
10%
Teacher
57,152
45%
1,241
33%
2,444
21%
SENCo
7,964
6%
24
1%
1,889
16%
Support
45,771
36%
963
26%
4,374
38%
Other
13,250
10%
165
4%
1,747
15%
Total
128,023
100%
3,767
100%
11,648
100%
Source: MI data
Engagement by activity type and role
Engagement with each activity type varied according to role. Nearly half of those who
engaged in AET Autism Training were in teaching roles. In contrast, nearly two-thirds
(62%) of those who participated in the ETF College SEND Provider Review were in
leadership positions. The proportion of leaders who engaged in other ETF activities was
lower: 40% for the ETF Community of Practice, and 35% for ETF SEND Events. For
nasen activities, engagement among individuals was split more evenly across roles. Over
half (53%) of those who engaged with nasen's Online Units were in support roles. A full
breakdown for each activity can be found in Table 8.
30
Table 8: Number of individuals as a proportion of activity type, split by role
AET
ETF
ETF
ETF
nasen
nasen Live
nasen
nasen
nasen
Autism
College
Community
SEND
Online
Discussions
Responsive
PD
Preparation
Training
SEND
of Practice
Events
Units
Webinars
Groups
for
Review
Adulthood
Leadership
3%
62%
40%
35%
6%
11%
19%
22%
26%
Teaching
45%
13%
29%
34%
22%
24%
15%
11%
15%
SENCo
6%
0%
1%
1%
8%
20%
36%
36%
16%
Support
36%
20%
25%
26%
53%
21%
8%
26%
14%
Other
10%
4%
6%
4%
11%
23%
23%
5%
29%
Base
128,023
69
701
2,997
6,608
2,620
1,468
736
216
Source: MI data
Chapter 3: Engagement in USS
CPD programmes, including USS, can only deliver impact if participants actively engage
with the offer, and the content responds to the needs of staff in different roles and
settings. To address the first research questions, on how delegates engaged with USS,
this chapter draws on evidence from the survey, case study interviews and reflective
diaries to identify how they first heard about USS, their motivations for engaging in the
programme, and a breakdown of the specific activities undertaken. It also explores
individuals' perceptions of the training's usefulness for informing their teaching and
support practice, to provide insights for addressing research question 3.
How delegates first heard about USS
Survey respondents were equally likely to have heard about USS from a work colleague
in their setting (33%) or directly through the providers (nasen, AET or ETF) (33%). Fewer
respondents found out about USS from a website search (10%) or through their local
authority or regional support (8%).
Interviewees and diarists had heard about USS from a range of colleagues in their
setting, from members of the senior leadership team (SLT) to support staff. For example,
a member of support staff in a secondary setting described how they were introduced to
nasen through a group of teaching assistants (TAs):
The setting I work in has a group of 9 TAs who meet weekly to discuss
students, offer advice, support and share any useful CPD. I was
introduced to nasen in one of these sessions. Diarist - Support staff,
Secondary setting
Motivations to engage in USS
Respondents were attracted to the programme for a range of reasons; the most frequent
motivation was keeping up to date with the latest thinking on SEND (66%). 35 Plugging
knowledge gaps was another common reason for engaging in USS (51%). Further
motivations included the increase in the number of pupils with SEND, including those
with complex needs, in their setting (46%), and to help develop their own internal training
for staff on SEND (44%) (Figure 1).
35 This survey question about motivations to engage in USS was added at a later date to the second on-
programme and final on-programme and impact survey, resulting in a total base of 964.
Figure 1: Survey respondents' motivations for taking part in USS (n=696).
To help me keep up-to-date with the latest thinking
66%
on SEND
To enable me to plug my own knowledge gaps
51%
An increase in the number of pupils with SEND,
46%
including those with complex needs at my setting
To help develop our own internal training for staff on
44%
SEND
To develop stronger links with parents and carers of
19%
SEND pupils
It was recommended to me by a colleague(s)
19%
Training and development in SEND has been
16%
identified as a priority by SLT
To help me progress into a new role or gain a
16%
promotion
I was required to do the training by my line manager
13%
Other training and support on SEND did not fully
11%
meet my needs
Ofsted identified SEND as an area for improvement
3%
within my setting
Other
3%
Source: Survey data
Keeping up to date with the latest thinking on SEND and plugging knowledge gaps were
the most common motivations for engaging in USS for all delegates, irrespective of role.
A significantly higher proportion of SLT (51%) and SENCos (57%) than those in support
roles (37%) were motivated to engage in USS because of an increased number of pupils
with SEND at their setting.
While keeping up to date with the latest thinking on SEND was the most frequent
motivation across all phases, staff in primary settings were more likely to be motivated by
an increased number of pupils with SEND in their setting (60%), compared with those in
secondary (38%) and college settings (29%).
33
Case study interviewees who sought to engage in the programme to plug gaps in their
SEND knowledge, in the context of increasing pupil need, described how USS had
enabled them to access resources that were appropriate to their specific needs and
existing level of knowledge:
My motivation was for my own knowledge gap or further interest. There
are some areas that I have got a relatively large amount of knowledge
on, and then there are other areas that I haven't. A lot of my personal
interest has been around mental health because it's on the rise in my
setting. Case study interviewee - SENCo, Primary setting
A further motivation for case study interviewees was to gain support in meeting the needs
of pupils with SEND more effectively, which is a high priority for many settings. Training
and CPD offered via programmes such as USS has enabled senior leadership teams to
identify and address aspects of their support provision that require improvement:
The first thing I would say is that our starting point with SEND, EHC
plans and high needs learners was it was already a focus of the college,
and an area that we knew we could improve and needed to do more
with. Case study interviewee - SLT, Sixth Form/FE College setting
SLT and SENCo staff were motivated to access USS to further enhance the CPD
provision within their setting. A college interviewee described how they made some
nasen Online Units a mandatory part of their internal CPD for learning support workers.
The aim was to help upskill staff so that they could more effectively support children and
young people with SEND:
We've used the Online Units to form part of what we call 'great
supporting'. So, it's a whole-year training and familiarisation programme
for learning support workers We've chosen 6 or 8 units that staff will all
complete before the end of this year. Mainly about mental health and
safety in the classroom. Case study interviewee - SLT, Sixth Form/FE
College setting
Profile of activity engagement
Survey respondents most commonly engaged in nasen Online CPD Units (54%),
followed by the AET Autism Training (52%) and nasen Live Webinars (37%) (Figure 2). A
further 30% of respondents reported that they had engaged with the downloadable
resources. The University of Derby's Lesson Study and Sea View Trust's Big Idea for
SEND were highly specialised, in-depth interventions; therefore, the level of engagement
from survey respondents was lower.
34
Figure 2: Proportion of survey respondents that engaged in USS activities
(n=1,654)
WSS/nasen - Online CPD Units
54%
AET - Autism Training
52%
WSS/nasen - Live Webinars
37%
WSS/nasen - Downloadable Resources
30%
ETF - Webinar or Live Sessions
15%
WSS/nasen - Professional Development Groups
9%
WSS/nasen - Specialist Spotlight: Live Sessions
9%
ETF - Community of Practice
7%
ETF - College SEND Provider Review
6%
WSS/nasen - Live Discussion Session
6%
WSS/nasen - Preparation for Adulthood from the
3%
Earliest Years Self Review Training
University of Derby - Action Research
3%
WSS/nasen - Peer Mentoring Support for School
2%
Leaders
Sea View Trust - Big Idea for SEND
2%
University of Derby - Lesson Study
1%
Source: Survey data
Nearly one-third (32%) of respondents engaged with nasen only, 20% with AET only, and
3% with ETF only. Nearly a quarter (23%) engaged with AET and nasen, compared with
8% who engaged with nasen and ETF. Only 6% of respondents engaged with all 3
providers, while 1% accessed only AET and ETF activities.
35
Number of activities engaged in
Survey respondents were most likely to have engaged in 1 activity (38%), while nearly a
quarter (23%) engaged in 2 activities. Around one-fifth of respondents engaged in 3
(19%) and 4 or more activities (20%).
Setting
A significantly higher proportion of respondents from sixth form/FE college settings (31%)
engaged with 4 or more activities than those from early years (14%), primary (16%),
secondary (19%), or other (17%) settings (Figure 3).
Figure 3: Number of USS activities survey respondents engaged in, by setting
Total (1648)
38%
23%
19%
20%
Early years (99)
54%
20%
12%
14%
Primary school (641)
42%
22%
20%
16%
Secondary school (333)
40%
25%
17%
19%
All-through school (137)
34%
21%
23%
22%
Sixth form / FE college (311)
27%
21%
21%
31%
Other (127)
31%
34%
18%
17%
1 activity
2 activities
3 activities
4 or more activities
Source: Survey data
Role
Survey respondents in senior positions typically engaged in more activities than those in
more junior roles. A significantly higher proportion of those in middle leadership (30%),
SLT (24%) and SENCo roles (24%) engaged in 4 or more activities than those in support
positions (12%) (Figure 4). In turn, those in support roles (49%) and teaching staff (45%)
were more likely to engage in just 1 activity, compared with SLT (31%) and SENCos
(27%).
36
Figure 4: Number of USS activities survey respondents engaged in, by role
SLT (255)
31%
23%
22%
24%
SENCO (463)
27%
23%
26%
24%
Teacher / EYP (279)
45%
22%
17%
17%
Support staff (470)
49%
24%
14%
12%
Other (66)
39%
21%
14%
26%
1 activity
2 activities
3 activities
4 or more activities
Source: Survey data
Year of first engagement
A significiantly higher proportion of respondents who first engaged with USS in the
academic year 2021/2022 (34%) reported that they had participated in 4 or more
activities, compared with those who first engaged in 2022/2023 (19%), 2023/2024 (14%),
or 2024/2025 (6%). Conversely, respondents who first engaged in 2024/2025 were more
likely to have undertaken just 1 activity (72%) than respondents who engaged in any
other year (Figure 5). This pattern of engagement is likely to be because recent
delegates have had less opportunity to engage in multiple USS activities. However, this
indicates the value delegates attach to the programme, and the usefulness of the training
and resources (discussed further below) - as well as evidence of sustained engagement
in USS, in line with DfE's standards for teachers' professional development.
37
Figure 5: Number of USS activities survey respondents engaged in, by year of first
engagement
Total (1,656)
38%
23%
19%
20%
2021/2022 (438)
21%
24%
21%
34%
2022/2023 (547)
30%
27%
24%
19%
2023/2024 (438)
47%
24%
16%
14%
2024/2025 (233)
72%
11%
11%
6%
1 activity
2 activities
3 activities
4 or more activities
Source: Survey data
Combination of activities
Survey respondents engaged in various combinations of USS activities, which differed
according to how many activities they undertook. For those who engaged in 2 activities,
the most common combination was the nasen Online CPD Units and AET Autism
Training (23%). Among those with 3 activities, respondents were most likely to have
engaged with nasen Online CPD Units, AET Autism Training, and nasen Live Discussion
Sessions. For those who engaged with 4 activities, respondents were most likely to have
undertaken a combination of nasen Online CPD Units, AET Autism Training, and nasen
Live Webinars and Live Discussion Sessions (Table 9). 36
36 We could not complete this analysis on the MI data because the three datasets could not be combined.
38
Table 9: Most common activity combinations
% of
Number of
Most common combination of
whole
activities
Occurrences
activities
survey
engaged with
sample
WSS/nasen - Online CPD
1
337
20%
Units
WSS/nasen - Online CPD
2
Units
89
5%
AET - Autism Training
WSS/nasen - Online CPD
Units
3
AET - Autism Training
55
3%
WSS/nasen - Live Discussion
Session
WSS/nasen - Online CPD
Units
AET - Autism Training
4
50
3%
WSS/nasen - Live Discussion
Session
WSS/nasen - Live Webinars
Source: Survey data
Usefulness of USS to inform teaching and support practice
Survey respondents rated the usefulness of their USS activities, in terms of informing
their teaching and support practice. Over half of respondents reported that the activities
were useful, irrespective of the type of provision/provider and their role. The activities
perceived to be useful by the largest majority of delegates tended to be the more
intensive interventions - particularly the ETF College SEND Provider Review (91%) and
nasen's Peer Mentoring Support for School Leaders (91%), which more than nine-out-of-
ten delegates rated as useful or very useful. However, the exception was downloadable
resources, where a similar proportion (94%) rated them as useful (Figure 6).³⁷
37 Some USS activities have low base sizes, including Peer Mentoring Support for School Leaders, Big
Idea for SEND (Sea View Trust) and Lesson Study - (University of Derby). Caution should therefore be
taken when interpreting the percentages.
39
Figure 6: Survey respondents' ratings of usefulness of USS activities to inform
teaching and support practice
WSS/nasen - Peer Mentoring Support for School
9%
18%
73%
Leaders (n=22)
ETF - College SEND Provider Review (n=92)
7%
25%
66%
WSS/nasen - Downloadable resources - e.g. Teacher
5%
29%
65%
Handbook (n=485)
ETF - Community of Practice (n=116)
12%
24%
64%
Sea View Trust - Big Idea for SEND (n=22)
14%
23%
64%
University of Derby - Lesson Study (n=19)
16%
21%
63%
University of Derby - Action Research (n=43)
12%
30%
58%
WSS/nasen - Online CPD units (n=812)
10%
31%
57%
WSS/nasen - Professional Development Groups
9%
34%
55%
(n=145)
WSS/nasen - Specialist Spotlight: Live Sessions
14%
32%
52%
(n=139)
ETF - Webinar or live Sessions (n=239)
9%
38%
51%
AET - Autism Training (n=494)
11%
39%
48%
WSS/nasen - Live Webinars (n=816)
14%
37%
47%
WSS/nasen - Preparation for Adulthood from the
12%
39%
47%
Earliest Years Self Review Training (n=49)
WSS/nasen - Live Discussion Session (n=91)
13%
37%
46%
1 - Not useful
2
3
4
5 - Very useful
Source: Survey data
40
Chapter 4: Effectiveness of delivery
This chapter addresses research question 2 by exploring how well-designed, targeted
and delivered USS is perceived to be. It considers the effectiveness of USS delivery, by
drawing on delegates' views about the content, facilitation and accessibility of the offer. It
also provides insights regarding how USS compares to other training, and how the
learning and insight from the programme has been shared and embedded.
USS content
Over four-fifths of survey respondents (85%) agreed or strongly agreed that the content
was appropriate to their position/role, while a similar proportion (83%) agreed it was
appropriate to their setting. A significantly higher proportion of respondents working
within primary settings (56%) strongly agreed that the content was appropriate to their
setting, compared with those working in sixth form or FE colleges (43%).
USS content was perceived to be pitched at the right level. Four-fifths (81%) of survey
respondents agreed or strongly agreed that the content was appropriate given their level
of prior knowledge, and a similar proportion (79%) agreed or strongly agreed that the
content addressed gaps in their existing knowledge and/or skills. However, there was a
slightly lower level of agreement (65%) that the content was tailored to delegates' specific
needs (Figure 7).
Figure 7: Survey respondents' perceptions about content of USS
The content was appropriate to my position/role
12%
31%
54%
(n=1,473)
The content was appropriate to my setting
13%
32%
51%
(n=1,539)
The content was appropriate for my level of prior
15%
31%
50%
knowledge (n=1,549)
The content addressed gaps in my knowledge
16%
33%
46%
and/or skills (n=1,543)
The content was tailored to my specific needs
6%
27%
31%
34%
(n=1,492)
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
41
Case study interviewees and diarists conveyed positive views about the high-quality offer
that extended across the suite of training delivered by nasen, AET and ETF. Many case
study interviewees, particularly teachers and support staff, from different settings, valued
the nasen Online CPD Units, which suggests that the content is appropriate for different
roles. They found the units on Understanding Behaviour as Communication and
Understanding and Promoting Resilience, as well as those focused on Speech,
Language and Communication, particularly valuable. Interviewees explained that this
was because the units encouraged them to reflect on their practice and consider the
ways in which it could be improved to support all children and young people in their
setting. A primary teacher valued the content of the 'Developing Maths Skills' unit
because it provided numerous examples of how to use visuals and gestures in teaching.
Senior leadership staff and SENCos across different settings also found the nasen
provision to be high quality - particularly the Webinars, Conferences, Peer Reviews,
Professional Networks and Teacher Handbook. 38 Interviewees highlighted that these
resources covered a broad range of subjects, and provided practical examples and case
studies that they could translate and embed in their own settings, together with
information about how to effectively track the progress of any changes made.
The most impactful part of the USS training was the Teacher Handbook.
It is a comprehensive collection and guide to key areas of SEND, with
practical applications across the curriculum and evidence-based
approaches for use in the classroom. Diarist - SLT, Secondary setting
Staff in other roles also emphasised how much they valued the practical, case study
content in USS activities, such as the nasen Online CPD Units. In addition, teachers,
support staff and SLT across all settings described the content as user-friendly, easy to
understand, and appropriately paced. They also found the content clear and
comprehensive, visually well-presented, and effectively organised into manageable
sections, so that it was easy to navigate.
I can take bits from each [unit] and use the various information to better
understand and support a wide range of different students in my setting. I
really enjoy these units as they are not too long that you lose interest.
The modules are all relevant and made very easy to understand, and
any jargon is explained clearly. Diarist - Support staff, Secondary setting
Many interviewees and diarists appreciated that the content was up to date and
evidence-based; this was regarded as a key strength of USS. A SENCo in a secondary
setting indicated that the evidence-based nature of the nasen Online CPD Units had
given them the confidence to share the content with others in their setting and had
helped them to secure colleagues' buy-in to the training.
38 The Teacher Handbook is a downloadable resource, produced by nasen.
42
The nasen CPD modules are well researched. The researched content
tells us that this is an effective way of working because this is the impact
that this work has had in previous schools and environments. Case study
interviewee - SENCo, Secondary setting
A few senior leaders across different settings reported that they had drawn on the
content to enhance staff training in their setting. This was perceived to have led to more
effective discussions and a deeper understanding among staff about how to assess and
meet the needs of children and young people with SEND.
The clarity of the Teacher Handbook (Section 1: Understanding your
role, and Section 6: Graduated Approach) enabled positive discussions
and contributions to staff training sessions. Clear links were made
between the legislative guidance, teachers' standards and LA [local
authority] expectations for the graduated approach. The handbook
provided a primary case study that helps staff to identify how needs
could be assessed and planned for in the graduated approach. Diarist -
SLT, Primary setting
A senior leader diarist in a secondary setting also described how they had used aspects
of the Teacher Handbook to deliver staff training on adaptive teaching. The content
enabled them to provide staff with both generic and subject-focused strategies to support
pupils. Staff who had engaged in the training were then able to cascade these strategies
within their departments for other staff to use in their lessons.
Another senior leader in a primary setting described how content in the nasen platform
had helped to strengthen their SEND provision, and relationships with families in
particular. The training enabled them to identify gaps in their provision and family
engagement, which they explored further through their NPQ SEND research and brought
into discussions at SLT meetings. As a result of completing the nasen Webinar 'Positive
beginnings: Supporting children with SEND at the start of their school journey', they were
able to develop an action plan for improving parental engagement.
Communication, facilitation and accessibility
Most survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that communication from the training
provider was clear (92%), that the facilitators were knowledgeable and engaging (91%),
and that the registration/application process was simple and straightforward (91%). A
majority of respondents also agreed or strongly agreed that they could access the
activities at a convenient time (86%) and fit the activities around their routine (84%)
(Figure 8).
43
Figure 8: Survey respondents' perceptions about communication, facilitation and
the accessibility of USS
The registration/application process was simple and
7%
27%
64%
straightforward (n=1473)
The communication from the training provider was
7%
32%
60%
clear (n=1513)
The facilitators were knowledgeable and engaging
8%
31%
60%
(n=1327)
I was able to access the activities at a convenient
11%
28%
58%
time (n=1508)
I was able to fit the activities around my routine
12%
30%
54%
(n=1492)
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
Case study interviewees and diarists, especially SENCos and SLT across different
settings, valued the convenience of the online activities and the opportunity to complete
them at a time that suited them. Interviewees described how they could access the
Online CPD Units at different points throughout the school year, enabling them to update
and refresh their knowledge, as well as to develop staff training. The flexibility to dip in
and out of modules at their own pace also helped to fit the training around their
demanding schedules.
Online training, which can be accessed as and when you are able, is
really convenient. Diarist - SENCo, Sixth Form/FE College setting
Interviewees and diarists were also positive about the delivery of in-person, real-time
activities, such as the action research study, or visits to other colleges as part of the ETF
College SEND Provider Review. One of the peer review activities included 'a day in the
life', which involved 2 colleges visiting each other's facilities, observing each other's work,
highlighting strengths, and suggesting areas for improvement. Senior leaders at one of
the participating colleges particularly valued this element, as it enabled teaching staff to
learn from peer practice in another college.
Another college visited our campuses and had a look at what we were
doing well and areas that we could consider improving, and then we
visited their facilities and engaged in a couple of different sessions. Case
study interviewee - SLT, Sixth Form/FE College setting
44
Facilitators were described as knowledgeable, engaging and supportive, which helped
delegates to get the most out of the activities. For example, a SENCo at a secondary
setting highlighted that facilitators were helpful and always available to respond to their
questions. Facilitators also engaged in meaningful discussions and acted as a critical
friend.
We felt that the facilitators were alongside us all of the way, and worked
with us in a coaching capacity, so that we got the most out of the Action
Research. We learnt a great deal, and everything that we learnt was
considered through the lens of our school and our children. Diarist -
SLT, Secondary setting
Activities that encouraged delegates to interact with each other, such as the nasen
Professional Development Groups or the ETF College SEND Provider Review, were also
valued by teachers, SENCos and SLTs across different settings. These activities enabled
them to network, learn from other delegates in other settings, and share best practice.
Overall satisfaction with support received
Most survey respondents (83%) rated the support they received through the USS
programme as excellent or good. Only a small minority (2%) rated it as poor. A
significantly higher proportion of respondents who had completed 4 or more activities
(50%) rated the support as excellent, compared with those who had completed 2
activities (37%); this suggests that a positive experience encourages delegates to access
further training and resources through the programme.
Nearly all respondents (95%) stated that they were likely or very likely to engage with
USS activities in the future. Those who reported being unlikely to engage in USS again
(n=45, 5%), were asked why (Figure 9). The most common reasons were a lack of time
(n=12, 27%) and not finding the activities useful (n=11, 24%).
45
Figure 9: Reasons why survey respondents are unlikely to engage with USS
activities in the future (n=32)
Lack of time
12
I didn't find the activities useful
11
It is not a requirement of my role
6
Other
6
I am planning to access SEND training from
3
elsewhere
There is a lack of suitable provision from USS
3
Lack of support from school/college/trust
2
I don't require any further training in SEND
1
Lack of resources
1
Source: Survey data
Programme improvements
Although survey respondents, interviewees and diarists were mostly positive about the
programme, they identified some aspects of USS that could be further enhanced:
Content
Some SENCos and support staff diarists in primary settings reported that the content
they engaged with lacked the detail required to meet their needs. For example, they
described the AET Autism Training as too general, and they would have welcomed more
content about the range of different behaviours and strategies to effectively support and
manage pupils with autism in their settings.
USS training [AET Autism Training] has been very surface-level. I don't
feel that it extended my existing understanding or experience. I would
like training to be more comprehensive and in-depth. Diarist - Support
staff, Primary setting
A SENCo and SLT interviewee echoed this sentiment, describing how the nasen Online
CPD Unit content provided more of a 'taster' and lacked specific and more tangible
examples that practitioners could use and implement. There was recognition that a range
of training was available through the programme, but that it would have been helpful to
46
have further information about the content, and signposting about how to locate it. This
interviewee also conveyed that individuals need to fully understand what the training
covers and how it aligns with their development needs before they enrol, to ensure the
most relevant training is accessed.
There is a lot of training on offer, so I think if you have an idea of what
exactly you are trying to get from it, you can then manipulate the training
available and find what is best. Case study interview - Primary, Trust
Lead and SENCo
Some early years and FE survey respondents and interviewees perceived that the online
content was more 'school centred, and therefore not always relevant to their context.
However, an early years diarist acknowledged that the content provided a broad
overview, which could be applied to other settings.
These reflections suggest that senior leaders and SENCos may require clearer and more
specific information about the training on offer, to enable them to make a more informed
decision about the training they and their staff access, and at what point. This does not
point to a need to make all training more in-depth and context-specific.
A small, diverse range of case study interviewees and diarists expressed their preference
for interactive elements in the training, such as quizzes. Some individuals across primary
and secondary settings would have also welcomed more in-person training. Some found
it difficult to fully engage with webinars and videos, with one SLT staff member finding the
former quite rushed in parts. A more focused, bite-sized approach could help delegates
to engage more effectively, which in turn would aid understanding.
A shorter, more structured and more focused session would enormously
enhance staff's understanding. Training should be in person, not online,
and include a more active element rather than simply being lectured at.
Diarist - Support staff, primary setting
Some case study interviewees and diarists also recommended access to printable
resources. In addition to supporting their own practice, printable resources could be
shared more widely with other staff.
Accessibility
A minority of individuals reported accessibility issues. Most were related to technical
problems experienced when accessing some of the live events; one member of support
staff in a college who encountered a problem was able to resolve this by contacting
nasen. Some also conveyed that scheduled timings for webinars were a barrier to
engagement, and recordings were not always available after the event. One described
how the links provided in resources did not always work or had expired.
47
A headteacher and SENCo case study interviewee in a primary setting recommended a
'layered' approach, to make the training more accessible and appropriate to staff at
different levels. This would prevent less experienced/knowledgeable staff from being
overwhelmed by the detail.
You could add different layers including 'Introductions to', 'What does
dyslexia look like in the classroom?', 'What does autism potentially look
like in a classroom for school children?' Because you could spend an
hour talking about that, with examples, then explore, 'How do you then
support?' Case study interview, Headteacher and SENCo, Primary
setting
Greater awareness of USS
The need for further promotion and marketing of the programme to schools and within
schools was a theme conveyed by a few teachers and SENCos interviewed. Some had
been unaware of the suite of USS activities available to them and only discovered them
by chance. Improved awareness amongst the education community would help to break
down barriers to engagement.
Raise awareness, as I accessed the training accidentally while
independently seeking CPD, and when I have spoken to other staff
members, they were unaware of it. Diarist - Classroom teacher,
Secondary setting
Engagement in other CPD provision
For most survey respondents, USS was the only form of CPD they had participated in
since the programme was launched. Less than one-third (29%) reported they had
engaged with other professional development activities or resources that were not part of
the USS. Significantly more SLT (40%) and SENCo (34%) respondents had engaged
with other forms of CPD, compared with teachers (22%).
Respondents referred to a wide range of other professional development activities, from
formal structured CPD to self-directed learning. Formal CPD was common; it included
face-to-face and online internal training courses run by external providers, postgraduate
level study, and conferences. NASENCO was referenced, as well as the NPQ for
SENCos that replaced it as the mandatory qualification for SENCos in maintained
schools. A minority of respondents referenced the PINS programme, which is currently
delivering tailored support to participating primary schools, to enable them to better meet
the needs of neurodivergent children and young people - in addition to the Autism in
Schools and Mental Health in Schools programmes. Informal courses delivered by
48
various school staff, often the SENCo, as part of INSET³⁹ days and/or staff meetings
were also prevalent. Other less-cited types of professional development included
collaborative CPD, such as mentoring, peer observation and professional networks.
Collaboration with other SENCos was most commonly mentioned, although local
authority and regional networks were also referenced, as well as those resulting from
formal CPD programmes. Self-directed learning typically included professional reading,
webinars and podcasts.
Although much of the CPD related to SEND more broadly, a high volume was specific to
a particular SEND need. This included dyslexia, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), autism, mental health, and speech and language. A wide range of providers
were referenced, such as local authorities, higher education institutions, and local and
national independent training providers.
Of those who engaged in other provision, most (78%) perceived the quality to be
comparable to USS, while 16% considered it to be better than USS.
Sharing learning from USS
Most (90%) survey respondents had shared the learning and insight gained through USS
with at least one other individual or group of staff within their setting. Learning was most
commonly shared with learning support assistants (60%), classroom
teachers/lecturers/tutors/early years practitioners (56%), and members of SLT (44%).
Sharing learning was not limited to staff within respondents' own workplaces, with nearly
one-fifth (18%) sharing learning with people outside their setting (Figure 10).
Further analysis highlighted differences by roles in relation to who delegates shared
insight with. Most SLT respondents shared their learning with a wide range of staff in
their setting, including other senior leaders (76%), classroom
teachers/lecturers/tutors/EYPs⁴ (67%), and teaching or learning support assistants
(65%). This suggests that SLT act as a conduit for disseminating knowledge gained
through USS. Similarly, most SENCos shared the learning and insight from USS with
staff at all levels, but particularly classroom teachers/lecturers/tutors/EYPs (74%) and
teaching or learning support assistants (72%). In contrast, classroom
teachers/lecturers/tutors/EYPs (55%) and teaching/learning support assistants/support
staff (54%) were most likely to share their learning and insight with peers in similar roles
to themselves.
39 In-service training days.
40 Early years practitioner.
49
Figure 10: Roles with whom delegates shared USS learning and insight (n=1,511)
Teaching or Learning Support Assistants
60%
Classroom Teachers/Lecturers/Tutors/Early
56%
Years Practitioners
Members of the Senior Leadership Team
44%
(SLT)
Support Staff (e.g. pastoral support, student
32%
counsellor)
Special Education Needs Coordinator
28%
(SENCO)
Middle Managers
26%
People outside of my setting
18%
Board of Governors
10%
Other roles in my setting
5%
I I have not shared the learning and insights
10%
with anyone
Source: Survey data
Insight from interviews and diarists reiterated the finding that learning from USS is shared
widely amongst staff, primarily by those in leadership or SENCo roles. Information and
knowledge were shared predominantly via INSET days and staff meetings. However,
sharing also occurred in other ways, such as informal training or coaching with specific
staff members. Those in more junior roles were more likely to share their knowledge
regarding individual children with relevant team members around them, either in person
or via email.
Barriers to sharing learning
The few senior leaders and SENCo diarists who had experienced difficulties in sharing
information and knowledge with their wider staff reported that the main barrier was a lack
of time - either regarding their own capacity to share the learning, or the ability of
teachers and support staff to attend the sessions where the learning was being shared.
Time was a particular barrier for those in primary and college settings. A primary senior
leader described having only 1 hour in a staff meeting to share USS learning, and this
was one of a number of items on the agenda.
50
A college SENCo described that their workload made it difficult to share the learning from
USS; particularly with support staff, because they did not have enough time allocated for
CPD during their working day:
My biggest barrier is being able to find the time to cascade information.
Particularly with Learning Support Assistants - as they don't get nearly
enough CPD time. Diarist - SENCo, College
Support staff, including TAs, only get paid for the hours they work, and staff meetings
where learning is commonly shared often take place outside their working day. A primary
teacher and SENCo reported that this was a further barrier to cascading information to
this group of staff. To overcome this, the school decided to pay TAs to attend the training;
this also helped to convey the importance and value of the training to staff.
We're very, very lucky that we can claim for the extra time. So, we can
either choose to have the pay or time in lieu if it fits round the class and
the teacher. Case study interviewee - TA, Primary setting
A primary-setting senior leader reported teacher wellbeing as a concern. They had been
reticent about asking teachers to attend additional CPD sessions, for fear of putting too
much pressure on staff who already had demanding workloads.
51
Chapter 5: Impact on delegates
The USS programme theory of change sets out a number of outcomes for the school
workforce, as well as for settings and pupils. This chapter presents evidence of the
changes in outcomes for the individuals who took part in USS activities, based on
analysis of the survey data and reflective diaries. This includes the perceived impact of
USS on delegates' SEND knowledge, and their confidence in supporting children and
young people with SEND. Delegates' perceptions of the programme's impact, in terms of
their ability to adapt and improve their teaching and support practice in response to
pupils' needs, is also explored, to provide insight into research question 2.
Increased knowledge about how SEND can affect engagement
in learning
Over three-quarters (77%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that USS
had increased their knowledge of how different SEND can affect the ways in which
children and young people engage with their learning (Figure 11). Additional analysis
showed that a significantly higher proportion of support staff (46%) strongly agreed that
their knowledge of how SEND can affect pupil engagement increased as a result of
participating in USS, compared with SENCos (34%).
Figure 11: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Engaging in
the USS has increased my knowledge about how different SEND can affect the
ways in which children and young people engage with their learning' (n=1,025)
4%
18%
37%
41%
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
Some diarists described how the training had improved their understanding of the impact
that different types of SEND can have on when or how a student engages with their
learning. For example, a SLT diarist in a primary setting explained how they had drawn
on the AET Autism Training, and used its practical support pack, in order to gain a better
understanding of an autistic pupil's social communication strengths and differences, and
their support needs. After monitoring changes in the pupil's behaviour and social
interactions throughout the school day, they observed that the student was more focused
during the morning and could engage in whole-class activities; in the afternoon, the pupil
found it more difficult to concentrate in group settings, and preferred individual activities.
52
This has been an incredibly useful tool for me, and one I will repeat
again, maybe at a different time of day to observe any changes in
interactions as the child goes through the routines of the day. I would like
to know if these levels [communication and interaction levels with other
students] differ at any time. Diarist - SLT, Primary setting
The diaries illustrated how increased knowledge of SEND's impact on pupils'
engagement in learning has influenced the practice of delegates in different job roles.
Those in senior leadership positions and SENCos indicated that their increased
knowledge had enabled them to support other members of staff in teaching and support
roles. For example, a SENCo in a primary setting had drawn on nasen's Online CPD
Units to help address situations when students with autism used socially unacceptable
language. In one example, the SENCo supported 2 TAs by taking control of a situation
and imparting their knowledge that challenging behaviours can be the result of an
underlying, unmet need. The SENCo adopted an 'exploratory' rather than 'accusatory'
approach to their conversations with the child, which helped the child to regulate and
reflect on the situation. The SENCo was able to draw on their knowledge to help other
staff understand how their behaviour and tone of voice influences children's behaviours.
Wider outcomes are reflections on the continuing conversations I have
with staff when challenging situations arise, as they may display
emotional responses such as raising their voice. Diarist - SENCo,
Primary setting
Delegates in support roles tended to draw on their knowledge to work more effectively
with individual students, although some did share insights with classroom teachers or
other key support staff involved. A diarist in a support role conveyed how they worked
with another TA and physiotherapist to aid a student with physical disabilities. They had
noticed in previous weeks a decline in the student's enthusiasm for learning. Using the
nasen Online CPD Unit about Promoting Resilience, they set more achievable goals for
the student, to give them a sense of success and increase resilience. They also
rewarded the student each time an objective was achieved. The support staff member
shared these strategies with other team members.
Having the ability to communicate effectively with my team was really
beneficial, as it helps everyone to better understand the needs of the
student. Diarist - Support staff, Secondary setting
Increased knowledge about how SEND can affect children and young
people physically, socially and emotionally
Over three-quarters (77%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that USS
had increased their knowledge of the ways in which different SEND can affect children
and young people physically, socially and emotionally (Figure 12). Additional analysis
53
demonstrated that a significantly higher proportion of those who had taken part in 4 or
more USS activities (47%) strongly agreed that the given them knowledge of how
different SEND can impact children and young people physically, socially and
emotionally, compared with those who had completed 3 activities (35%). Perceptions of
impact also differed by role: a significantly higher proportion of SENCos (46%) than SLT
(31%) and support staff (32%) agreed that engaging with USS had increased their
knowledge.
Figure 12: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Engaging in
the USS has increased my knowledge about the ways in which different SEND can
affect children and young people physically, socially and emotionally' (n=1,031)
4%
18%
37%
40%
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
Around one-third of diarists from all settings reported that engaging in USS had improved
their knowledge of different triggers, and how these can affect children and young people
physically, socially and emotionally. Triggers come in many forms, including how the
child is feeling (e.g., heightened anxiety or a lack of communication skills) or the school
environment (e.g., busy classrooms increasing cognitive load). The following example
from a diarist shows how engaging with AET training helped to improve their
understanding of a child's sensory needs.⁴¹
41 The STAR Chart is a tool provided by AET to aid understanding in an individual. This is achieved by
recording and analysing incidences of distressed behaviours.
54
Using the AET training to effectively support a pupil's sensory
needs
A member of SLT at a single-form primary setting described a situation where they
had been able to successfully apply Tool 9 (STAR chart) from the AET training 'Good
autism practice in schools'. Along with the class teacher, they noticed that a student
with autism had been displaying distressed behaviours for several weeks.
The SLT member worked with the teacher, applying the AET STAR chart to help
identify patterns of behaviour with the child. The STAR chart (i.e., Strengths, Targets,
Actions, Review) is a framework designed to help staff identify students' strengths and
needs, as well as to develop specific learning and action plans. The implementation of
this tool helped both members of staff to better understand the child's sensory needs
and behavioural triggers (e.g., if the child had not slept or eaten enough before
school). The diarist remarked that this had enabled them to more effectively pre-empt
situations and identify potential triggers within the child's environment. The SLT
member commented that staff were now more confident about supporting the child
effectively. Adopting a more consistent approach was also helping to foster stronger
relationships with the child's parents.
This tool has helped us enormously. We now all feel more confident
in being able to support the child throughout their day. We are all
following the same tool, which means we are all working from the
same page and are familiar with the strategies to support each other,
as well as the child. Diarist - SLT, Primary setting
The SLT member had shared the tool with other support staff in the setting and hoped
all those staff would be able to access the training from AET to develop their own
knowledge.
Increased knowledge about the different types of SEND
Over two-thirds (70%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that USS had
increased their knowledge regarding the different types of SEND (Figure 13). Additional
analysis showed that USS was most impactful for those who engaged in more activities.
A significantly higher proportion of survey respondents who had taken part in 4 or more
USS activities (46%) strongly agreed that the training increased their knowledge of the
different types of SEND, compared with those who had completed 1 (34%) or 3 activities
(32%). There were no significant differences by role.
55
Figure 13: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Engaging in
the USS has increased my knowledge about the different types of SEND' (n=1,016)
5%
22%
34%
36%
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
A couple of diarists reported that USS had increased their knowledge of ADHD and
autism. Others reported that they had acquired greater knowledge about children and
young people with language and processing needs and physical disabilities, as well as
those with high needs (e.g., children who are non-verbal and/or with social, emotional
and mental health needs).
USS had improved some diarists' knowledge of how autistic children and young people
process social cues and respond to the emotional reactions of others. For example, a
diarist in a support role described how the nasen Online CPD Unit on Speech, Language
and Communication Needs assisted in building a stronger relationship with a student.
USS has helped me support a child with autism. They can exhibit
challenging behaviour, when they struggle to communicate with others
and they get frustrated and lash out. The child really likes crafting
activities, so we made emotion cards. We spent around half an hour on
this, although lots of time was spent chatting, which gave me a chance to
get to know more about their interests, to tailor future sessions. Diarist -
Support staff, Primary setting
Diarists in more senior roles were more likely to make changes informed by the learning
acquired from USS at the setting level, whereas those in support roles tended to
implement changes for specific children. For example, a SENCo in a primary setting
applied the USS training to support several young children in their setting who had
experienced trauma. The SENCo explained how they had implemented changes
designed to help the children understand the emotions they were going through. These
included referral to therapies and the introduction of wellbeing programmes.
The topic around neuroplasticity was something that we really believe in
and feel that we have the opportunity to change and improve the outlook
for some of our children who have experienced trauma, by giving them
the right support to work through their emotions. Diarist - - SENCo,
Primary setting
56
There were instances where either the teacher or those in a support role had embedded
their knowledge about specific types of SEND to support individual children. For
example, an EY practitioner and TA used ABC charts together, to identify the reasons
why a child in their class was biting. After identifying that the behaviour was due to the
child feeling frustrated, they collectively changed how they communicated with the child,
using options and visual prompts to improve provision.
This situation involves me, an apprentice and another TA in the
classroom. We have had a new child start with us who is non-verbal, is
clingy, uses a dummy, gets upset frequently and bites. I spoke to staff
regarding giving the child options to allow opportunities to communicate
and use visual prompts to help. Diarist - EY practitioner, Early Years
setting
Adapting teaching practice
Over three-quarters (78%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that USS
has equipped them with the skills to adapt their teaching practice in response to the
needs of children and young people with SEND (Figure 14).
Figure 14: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Engaging in
the USS has given me the skills to adapt my teaching practice in response to the
needs of children and young people with SEND' (n=909)
4%
17%
40%
37%
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
Additional analysis indicated that USS was most impactful for those who engaged in 4 or
more activities. A significantly higher proportion of these respondents (48%) strongly
agreed that the training provided them with the skills to adapt their teaching practice to
the needs of children and young people with SEND, compared with those who had
completed 1 (35%), 2 (33%) or 3 (35%) activities.
Three-quarters (74%) of classroom teachers/EY practitioners strongly agreed or agreed
that USS had given them the skills to adapt their teaching practice, while a slightly lower
proportion of SLT (68%) and SENCos (67%) strongly agreed or agreed. There was only
one significant difference by role, where a higher proportion of SENCo (50%) than SLT
respondents (32%) agreed that engaging with USS had equipped them with the skills to
adapt their teaching practice in response to the needs of children and young people with
SEND.
57
Findings also indicated that a higher proportion of respondents who first engaged with
USS in the 2022/2023 academic year (45%) agreed that USS has provided them with the
skills to adapt their teaching practice to the needs of children and young people with
SEND, compared with those who began in 2024/2025 (33%).
Embedding skills to adapt teaching and support practice
Once equipped with the necessary skills, most respondents (89%) reported that they
had, to some or a large extent, embedded the learning from USS to adapt their teaching
and support practice. Just 2% had not adapted their practice at all informed by USS,
while nearly one-in-ten respondents (9%) reported that it was too early to say. There
were no significant differences by role.
Additional analysis indicated that USS was most impactful for those who engaged in 4 or
more activities. A significantly higher proportion of these respondents (40%) had
embedded their learning to adapt their practice to a large extent, compared with those
who had only engaged in 1 activity (17%).
Sustained engagement over time is also impactful. Significantly more survey respondents
(36%) who first engaged with USS in the 2021/2022 academic year reported embedding
learning from USS to inform their teaching practice to a large extent, compared with
those who began in 2023/2024 (21%) or 2024/2025 (21%).
Several diarists provided examples of how they had embedded their learning to adapt
their teaching practice as a result of engaging with USS. Those in teaching roles across
all settings described introducing new activities and/or interventions to ensure that
children and young people with SEND could engage in whole-class activities effectively
and had a positive learning experience. A member of SLT in a college setting explained
how the nasen Online CPD Unit on Behaviour Management and Emotional Regulation
helped them to provide an intervention for students who felt overwhelmed with their
college work. This diarist adopted positive coping mechanisms (for example, reassurance
that making mistakes is part of learning), active listening strategies, and open-ended
questions to understand students' concerns. As a result, students were perceived to be
able to regulate their emotions more effectively and engage more fully in their learning.
Another diarist, a classroom teacher in a primary setting, explained how they had used
the nasen Online CPD Unit on Creating an Emotionally Safe Environment, in order to
work collaboratively with the classroom TA to help children who were unsettled and found
it difficult to self-regulate. The training supported them in introducing a range of activities
to help reduce children's anxiety.
We created a plan for regular brain breaks for a couple of children
(sensory circuit, walk, ball bouncing, or time in play area followed by
breathing techniques), and movement breaks and breathing for the
whole class. We looked at checking in with certain children to see how
they were feeling. Diarist - Teacher, Primary setting
58
Several diarists described that simple changes informed by USS, which did not require
significant time, had been impactful for children and young people with SEND in their
setting. For example, a diarist in a secondary setting detailed how engaging in USS had
enabled them to make changes to GCSE lesson materials. They had identified that some
learning materials were very 'text-heavy' and not suitable for dyslexic students; thus,
adapting the font size and text spacing on worksheets had a positive impact for students.
It worked well, and 2 students unprompted made comments about it
looking better and being easier to read. I think that this is better for some
students, as they found they could be more independent with their
reading. Diarist - Teacher, Secondary setting
Other diarists described how they had adapted their practice to be more visual, in order
to effectively support children and young people with SEND. For example, a classroom
teacher in a primary setting embedded learning from nasen's Online CPD Units to help
autistic pupils with their communication and social skills, by devising a simple board
game with visual prompts. The teacher observed that students were more engaged,
keen, and had started to communicate more.
By the end, all students participated with enthusiasm, showcasing
improved patience and communication. This reinforced the importance of
visual supports and predictability. Diarist - Teacher, Primary setting
The following example details how nasen Online CPD Units were used to adapt teaching
practice, to support students' development of mathematical thinking.
59
Using gesture techniques in maths lessons to help develop
mathematical thinking in a reception class
A teacher in a two-form entry primary setting explained how they used the nasen
Online CPD Units to plug their knowledge gaps. The insight from the units
complemented ongoing training delivered by their SLT. In one diary entry, they
described how they had used Unit 17: Mathematical Thinking, to adapt their approach
with their reception class.
The teacher explained how children within their class were at different stages in their
development of mathematical thinking. In recent lessons, the focus had been on using
language to accurately describe the relative positions of numbers from 1 to 10. The
teacher outlined how they traditionally use stem sentences, which are structured
sentence starters that help students develop their mathematical language and
problem-solving skills (e.g., 'The number 5 is made up of 3 and 2'). It was highlighted
that these can be 'clunky and unnatural, and children can find it hard to use or
remember them.
The teacher detailed how they used training from the Online Units to explore the use
of gesture to help further develop their students' understanding of mathematical
language. Gesture techniques allowed the teacher to reinforce the concepts being
taught by applying visual movement (e.g., holding up three fingers for the number 3).
They perceived that using gesture had helped them improve their teaching and
supported the children - including those who struggled with communication - to
develop their thinking.
Using gesture can help me clarify what I am trying to impart, and the
children express their thinking even if their communication and
language skills are delayed. Diarist - Teacher, Primary setting
The teacher suggested there would be benefits from the widespread use of gesture in
maths across the setting. As a result, the SENCo was planning to organise training to
ensure continuity of the approach.
Increased leadership skills
Nearly two-thirds (65%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that USS had
enhanced their leadership skills (Figure 15). Further analysis showed that a significantly
higher proportion of survey respondents who had taken part in 4 or more USS activities
(45%) strongly agreed that USS had enhanced their leadership skills, compared with
those who had completed 1 (28%), 2 (26%) or 3 (31%) activities.
60
There were no significant differences between role and enhanced leadership skills,
although agreement was highest among middle leaders (80%) and SLT (75%), compared
with SENCos (64%), classroom teachers (63%) and support staff (59%).
Figure 15: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Engaging in
the USS has enhanced my leadership skills' (n=851)
7%
25%
33%
32%
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
There is some limited evidence from case study interviewees and diarists that USS has
improved leadership skills. Some described using learning and insight from USS to
inform the design and delivery of internal staff training, or to help mentor newly qualified
staff. The diarist in the pen portrait below showcases how engagement with the nasen
Teacher Handbook increased their knowledge of the graduated approach, which
subsequently supported them in leading internal staff training within their setting.
61
How the Teacher Handbook informed internal CPD on the graduated
approach
The graduated approach is a cyclical model of support for pupils with SEND,
consisting of 4 stages (assess, plan, do, review). A middle leader in a single-form
entry primary setting explained how they used Section 6 of the Teacher Handbook to
lead a CPD session on the graduated approach, in conjunction with the Assistant
SENCo. The aim was to equip staff with a better understanding of this approach and
enable them to implement it effectively, in order to set reasonable targets for pupils
with SEND across the setting.
All staff attended the training, which included a question-and-answer session that
gave staff the opportunity to ask questions and seek clarification on a one-to-one
basis. The middle leader remarked that the training had been a positive experience for
staff, who felt comfortable in asking questions about the approach and how it would
apply to their practice. As a result of the training and support provided to staff, student
targets were more specific and measurable, and tailored to their individual needs. The
middle leader also observed that, since the training, the graduated approach had been
applied more consistently, as staff became more confident about using the learning in
their practice.
Outcomes for staff included the fact that they were really confident
with what they now have to do - the opportunity to take part in a
carefully planned CPD session really enabled and empowered them.
Diarist - Middle leader, Primary setting
Increased confidence
Identification of needs
Three-quarters (75%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that engaging in
USS had increased their confidence to identify the needs of children and young people
with SEND (Figure 16). Further analysis showed that a significantly higher proportion of
survey respondents who had taken part in 4 or more USS activities (49%) strongly
agreed that USS had increased their confidence in identifying the needs of children and
young people with SEND, compared with those who had completed 1 (31%) or 2 (36%)
activities. There were no significant differences by role in relation to this outcome.
62
Figure 16: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Engaging in
the USS has increased my confidence to identify the needs of children and young
people with SEND' (n=990)
4%
19%
37%
38%
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
To effectively identify the needs of children and young people, SLT and SENCo diarists
described how they shared knowledge with class teachers who interacted with children
and young people with SEND on a regular basis. The following pen portrait from a diarist
in a primary setting showcases how using the AET individual sensory checklist increased
their confidence in identifying the sensory needs of a child.
Using an AET tool to help identify sensory needs
A SENCo in a single-form entry primary school described how they used USS training
to strengthen support for children and young people with SEND. By applying the AET
individual sensory checklist, they were able to confidently identify the sensory needs
of a particular pupil and better understand how these needs influenced the child's
learning.
The SENCo, who worked alongside the class teacher to complete the checklist,
described it as a 'clear document with well-worded criteria'. Using the tool enabled the
SENCo to share key information with the safeguarding team, and to create a sensory
profile for the pupil designed to improve their engagement in learning. The SENCo
also reported feeling more confident in applying the tool to other pupils, to identify and
understand their needs.
Looking ahead, the SENCo plans to embed this approach more widely by creating
sensory profiles for all pupils with SEND. This will ensure that sensory needs are
recognised and understood consistently across the setting.
63
Liaising with parents/carers and other professionals
Around three-quarters of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that engaging in
USS had a positive impact on their confidence about liaising with parents or carers (71%)
and other professionals (75%) (Figure 17). A significantly higher proportion of survey
respondents who had taken part in 4 or more USS activities (49%) strongly agreed that
USS had increased their confidence in liaising with parents or carers of children and
young people with SEND, compared with those who had completed 1 (31%), 2 (36%) or
3 (32%) activities. There were no significant differences by role.
Figure 17: Survey respondents' level of agreement that their engagement with USS
has increased their confidence levels to liaise with other professionals and
parents/carers of children and young people with SEND
Other professionals that work with
4%
19%
35%
39%
children and young people with SEND
Parents and carers of children
5%
22%
34%
37%
and young people with SEND
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
There is some limited evidence from case study interviewees and diarists, regarding
USS's impact on their confidence in liaising with parents or carers of children and young
people with SEND, and with other professionals. In one example, a classroom teacher
diarist in a primary setting detailed how their confidence in liaising with a child's parents
had increased after engaging with the nasen Online CPD Units on Speech and Language
Needs.
I feel better equipped to discuss the report [about the child's speech and
language needs] with the SENCo and the child's parents, and to
construct a pathway to help the child, in consultation with their parents.
Diarist - Teacher, Primary setting
In a further example, an SLT diarist from a college setting explained how the ETF
Community of Practice (a professional learning network, providing support for those
working in college settings) had given them the confidence to challenge a local authority
decision when they placed a student at their college mid-year. The SLT staff member
drew on advice from colleagues about good practice, to explain why their college was not
a viable solution for the student.
64
I used the experiences of my peers in the Community of Practice to take
part in a meeting with a learner and the local authority. The local
authority knows our position on rushed mid-year starts, and also how we
can support transition ahead of a September start. Diarist - SLT, Sixth
Form/FE College setting
Job satisfaction
Over three-fifths (62%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that USS has
increased their job satisfaction (Figure 18). Further analysis shows that a significantly
higher proportion of respondents who participated in 4 or more USS activities (41%)
strongly agreed that the training increased their job satisfaction, compared with those
who had completed 2 (24%) or 3 (28%) activities. Analysis by setting showed that a
significantly higher proportion of respondents from secondary settings (37%) than those
in primary settings (24%) strongly agreed that engaging in USS had increased their job
satisfaction. Findings also indicated that a significantly higher proportion of respondents
from settings where the proportion of pupils or learners with an EHC plan or SEN is
higher than average⁴² strongly agreed (34%) that engaging in USS had increased their
job satisfaction, compared with those in settings where the proportion with an EHC plan
or SEN is lower than average (18%).
Figure 18: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Engaging in
the USS has increased my job satisfaction' (n=935)
4%
6%
28%
31%
31%
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
USS was perceived to have had a positive impact on diarists' enjoyment of their role, and
this increased their job satisfaction. Diarists reported that seeing the difference they
made to the lives of children and young people with SEND in their setting, as a result of
applying the skills and knowledge gained from USS, was particularly rewarding. A diarist
in a support role in a secondary setting described how prior to the training, they were
finding it difficult to effectively support students with the transition to secondary school.
Engaging with the nasen Online CPD Units increased their understanding of how the
42 On average, 18% of pupils in England have Special Educational Needs (SEN) or an Education and
Health Care Plan (EHC plan).
65
transition process works, which meant they were better able to support their colleagues;
as a result, they were happier in their job.
I actually enjoy this part of my role, which is something I was previously
not so keen on doing, as I had very little knowledge on how to best
support anxious students transitioning. Diarist - Support staff, Secondary
setting
66
Chapter 6: Impact on educational settings
The USS programme theory of change (Appendix 2) sets out a number of intended
outcomes at the setting level. To understand progress towards the achievement of these
outcomes, this chapter explores changes at the setting level that have been implemented
as a result of staff engaging with USS. These include changes in relation to teaching and
support practice, the prioritisation of SEND and the processes for identifying pupils'
needs, and settings' culture and ethos. The analysis also considers the extent to which
setting-level changes are resulting in more children and young people with SEND having
their needs identified and met earlier, to provide insight into research question 4.
Changes made across settings
Most survey respondents⁴³ indicated that their setting had made some changes in areas
related to SEND, informed by USS. The area where the most amount of change occurred
was teaching practice, followed by support at key transition points. The least amount of
change reported was in relation to SEND policy.
Teaching practice
Most survey respondents (87%) reported that their setting had made changes to teaching
practice (to some or a great extent), informed by learning and insight from USS (Figure
19). A significantly higher proportion of respondents in SLT positions (89%) than those in
middle leadership roles (78%) reported that changes had been made in their settings.
Figure 19: The degree to which survey respondents' school/college/trust has made
changes to teaching practice, informed by learning and insight from USS (n=647)
6%
4%
62%
25%
No, but we plan to in the next 12 months
No, but we plan to beyond the next 12 months
No, and we don't plan to
No, this has not changed
Yes, to some extent
Yes, to a great extent
Source: Survey data
43 This question was only provided to SLT, middle leadership and SENCo respondents.
67
The previous chapter provided evidence of changes made by individual practice informed
by USS. Examples of changes to practice that had been implemented at a setting level
were also identified through the case study interviews and diaries. For example, one SLT
diarist in a primary setting reflected on how nasen's Leadership and SENCo Toolkit had
improved their understanding of the way in which ADHD affects children's concentration
and attention. This led to discussions in staff meetings about existing practices and
resources, which identified elements that were not meeting the needs of children and
young people effectively. The setting subsequently implemented changes, such as the
introduction of movement breaks, to support concentration and regulation for all children,
not just those with ADHD. In addition, the setting introduced task planners; all its
teachers are now required to integrate them into their lesson plans, to inform learning
objectives and outcomes for children and young people with ADHD.
Sharing the resource [Leadership and SENCo Toolkit] with all staff has
broadened their understanding about ADHD and enabled discussions
between colleagues about our approaches that were previously not best
meeting needs. Diarist - SLT, Primary setting
Another SLT diarist in a primary setting who had engaged with AET training delivered
staff training during an INSET day, regarding how to use visual materials (including
objects of reference⁴⁴ and widget visuals⁴⁵) to support communication with children and
young people with autism. The diarist perceived that staff training had enhanced their
understanding of communication needs, equipped them with the skills and confidence to
incorporate visual materials into their teaching practice, and ensured a more consistent
approach to communication across the setting.
Staff were keen to fully understand the extent to which [the adapted
visuals] will help their key children. Students should benefit from having
their communication needs better met. Diarist - SLT, Primary setting
USS has also informed changes in practice within FE settings. For example, an SLT
diarist delivered staff training on individualised support plans for students, informed by
the USS training they had engaged in. This led to a more unified approach to supporting
children and young people with SEND in their setting.
44 Objects of reference are real items that can be used to represent people, places or activities; they help
those with communication difficulties to understand or anticipate what might be happening or is about to
happen.
45 Widget visuals are symbol-based communication tools designed to help pupils with SEND understand,
process and communicate information.
68
We used the tools and frameworks from the training to develop tailored
approaches for students. During the 60-minute staff training session, we
identified strategies to implement in the classroom, ensuring that each
student receives the appropriate level of support for their needs. Diarist -
SLT, Sixth form/FE college setting
Support at key transition points
Nearly three-quarters (73%) of survey respondents indicated that their setting had made
changes (to some or a great extent) to the ways in which children and young people were
supported at key transition points, informed by learning and insights from USS. A further
10% reported that their setting would be making changes in the future (Figure 20).
Figure 20: The degree to which survey respondents' school/college/trust has made
changes to the way in which children and young people are supported at key
transition points, informed by learning and insight from USS (n=616)
7%
3%
16%
53%
19%
No, but we plan to in the next 12 months
No, but we plan to beyond the next 12 months
No, and we don't plan to
No, this has not changed
Yes, to some extent
Yes, to a great extent
Source: Survey data
Several diarists provided examples of how USS had helped them to develop resources
and host events to support pupils and their parents/carers at key transition points. For
example, a SENCo diarist in a primary setting embedded insight from the nasen Online
CPD Unit on Transition, into a workshop for Year 6 pupils and their families, to support
the transition to secondary school. The diarist reported that some parents subsequently
implemented the suggested strategies to support their child, and the class teacher felt
more confident in liaising with parents and addressing any concerns they had about their
child's transition to secondary school.
Some parents really took on board the advice suggested by the
professionals involved. The class teacher is more confident to approach
transition discussion and activities. Diarist - SENCo, Primary setting
In another example, an SLT diarist from a secondary setting adapted their transition
programme for students starting Year 7 by embedding learning from the nasen SEND
Toolkit. The diarist observed that as a result of the changes made, the transition process
was working more effectively.
69
We have adapted our transition programme and the booklet information
for parents. It makes the process more consistent, so staff, students and
parents now have all the information required to make the transition
process smoother than in previous years. Diarist - SLT, Secondary
setting
Regular school attendance is important at all times, but particularly during key transition
points, to help students navigate the change successfully. A secondary-setting participant
described how attendance data and information sharing with feeder primary schools had
been a focus, to ensure appropriate provision for pupils with SEND was in place when
they began Year 7. One SLT interviewee explained how attending the USS Preparing for
Adulthood conference had deepened their understanding of the importance of accessing
primary school attendance data, when supporting pupils transitioning to secondary
school. Following the conference, the interviewee collaborated with the internal
attendance lead and visited all feeder primary settings to obtain attendance figures for
incoming pupils. This enabled them to proactively identify needs and put appropriate
support in place.
I came back [from the conference] and spoke to our attendance lead. I
visited all of the primary schools in the next few weeks. One of my jobs
will be to record the current attendance figures of all of those young
people. Diarist - SLT, Secondary setting
The following pen portrait details how a college setting developed its transition process
after engaging in the USS College SEND Provider Review.
70
How USS strengthened transition processes in a college setting
A member of SLT within a college group described how the USS SEND Provider
Review led to significant improvements in their transition processes for learners with
SEND, including those with an EHC plan.
One leader explained that, because the college operates across multiple campuses,
achieving consistency in processes and protocols had always been a challenge.
Engaging in the College SEND Provider Review prompted a full reconsideration of
transition arrangements, resulting in clearer, more consistent practice across all sites.
A key change was the introduction of an initial interview with a member of the
Additional Learning Support (ALS) team for every learner with SEND. This step
ensures that reasonable required adjustments are identified and crucial information
(such as safeguarding details) is received from secondary schools promptly. Following
this, a collaborative meeting takes place, involving wider stakeholders, including ALS
staff, curriculum staff, the learner's parent or carer, and a representative from the
secondary school.
We've put this extra step into our transition process, where we have
an initial look at the learner and make sure that it's even possible for
us to cater for their needs - because once we're the named provider,
we're the named provider. Case study interviewee - SLT, Sixth
Form/FE College setting
According to leaders, this strengthened transition process has already led to tangible
improvements. Learners are more likely to be placed on the right course, attendance
has increased, and achievement levels have improved. The ALS team also feels
better prepared to deliver bespoke training and make well-informed reasonable
adjustments.
Leaders were clear that these improvements would not have been implemented if they
had not engaged in the USS SEND Provider Review:
No [when asked if the changes would have been made without
engaging in the review]. One hundred per cent not. I think there's so
much expertise out in the sector, and what this did was give us the
opportunity to bring it all together. Case study interviewee - SLT,
Sixth Form/FE College
Pastoral support
Seven-out-of-ten (70%) survey respondents indicated that their setting had changed its
pastoral support, informed by learning and insight from USS, and 7% planned to make
71
changes in the future (Figure 21). Further analysis shows that a significantly higher
proportion of respondents from primary settings (79%) than secondary settings (59%)
had made changes to pastoral support.
Figure 21: The degree to which survey respondents' school/college/trust has made
changes to pastoral support, informed by learning and insight from USS (n=595)
6%
3%
20%
52%
18%
No, but we plan to in the next 12 months
No, but we plan to beyond the next 12 months
No, and we don't plan to
No, this has not changed
Yes, to some extent
Yes, to a great extent
Source: Survey data
The case study interviewees and diarists tended not to focus on changes made to
pastoral care after engaging with USS. However, in one example, a member of support
staff within a secondary setting highlighted how they had shared resources from their
USS training with their attendance team, to help reduce school avoidance. The insight
from the resources enabled attendance staff to feel more confident when gathering the
voices of students and parents and supported conversations and meetings with students
in their setting. Although it was too early to identify any impacts on the prevalence of
school avoidance, staff within the setting were optimistic that the changes would have a
positive effect:
The attendance team have said that they are going to rethink how they
talk to pupils and parents and now have several new strategies that they
are going to implement. They felt as if these resources will have a
massive benefit to all students and families where attendance and school
avoidance is an issue. Diarist - Support staff, Secondary setting
Process for identifying SEND needs
Two-thirds (66%) of survey respondents indicated that their setting had changed its
processes for identifying SEND needs, at least to some extent, informed by learning and
insights from USS. Around one-third (34%) had not made any changes to their
processes, but 7% planned to make changes in the future (Figure 22).
72
Figure 22: The degree to which survey respondents' school/college/trust has made
changes to processes for identifying SEND needs among children and young
people, informed by learning and insight from USS (n=636)
6%
3%
24%
46%
20%
No, but we plan to in the next 12 months
No, but we plan to beyond the next 12 months
No, and we don't plan to
No, this has not changed
Yes, to some extent
Yes, to a great extent
Source: Survey data
Additionally, three-fifths (60%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that as a
result of learning and insight from USS, the needs of children and young people with
SEND were being identified earlier within their setting (Figure 23).
Figure 23: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Because of
USS, within my school/college/trust the needs of children and young people with
SEND are being identified earlier' (n=809)
7%
30%
32%
28%
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
Case study interviewees and several diarists, typically SLT and SENCos across all
settings, outlined changes designed to streamline processes for identifying and meeting
SEND needs.
In another example, a practitioner working in a college detailed how their USS training
had helped their setting to strengthen its processes for identifying SEND needs,
particularly for students with autism. The college developed a flow chart setting out the
process for identifying SEND. This has made the process more transparent for staff and
students, and improved efficiency, so that needs are identified earlier. All new staff
members are now trained to use the chart.
73
We have since written a flow chart schedule of the process which
enables everyone, including the learner, to understand where we are and
whose responsibility it is. It has taught us across the board that
communication is the key, and working together will achieve the fastest
results. Case study interviewee - Practitioner, Sixth Form/FE College
setting
In another example, engagement in the AET Autism Training and nasen Online CPD
Units enabled a primary setting to better identify SEND and implement processes more
efficiently, in order to ensure accurate diagnosis and support provision:
Engaging in USS has enabled us to highlight and fast-track children that
needed further diagnosis or additional external support. Case study
interviewee - SENCo, Primary setting
Liaising with parents and carers
Two-thirds (66%) of survey respondents indicated that their setting had made at least
some changes to how staff liaise with parents and carers of children and young people
with SEND, informed by learning and insights from USS. Around one-third (34%) had not
made any changes, with one-in-ten (10%) conveying that they planned to make changes
in the future (Figure 24).
Figure 24: The degree to which survey respondents' school/college/trust have
made changes to the way that staff liaise with parents and carers of children and
young people with SEND, informed by learning and insight from USS (n=616)
7%
3%
21%
50%
16%
No, but we plan to in the next 12 months
No, but we plan to beyond the next 12 months
No, and we don't plan to
No, this has not changed
Yes, to some extent
Yes, to a great extent
Source: Survey data
Case study interviewees and diarists provide limited evidence about setting-level
changes to how staff liaise with parents and carers of children and young people with
SEND. However, a teacher diarist in a secondary setting outlined how they had
strengthened their communication with parents/carers about core subject interventions
74
offered to particular children and young people with SEND. Baseline assessments in
English and maths identified the level of support required by the students. Level of
support was colour-coded, and those rated 'red' - the highest level - were added to the
school's SEND register. This process was used to keep parents informed about the
support in place.
Letters also mail-merged home to parents/carers, to keep them in the
loop with regards to the support being offered. Diarist - Teacher,
Secondary setting
SEND policy
Over half (57%) of survey respondents indicated that their setting had made at least
some changes to their SEND policy, informed by learning and insights from USS. While
two-fifths (43%) indicated no changes to date, just over one-in-ten (11%) planned to
make changes in the future (Figure 25).
Figure 25: The degree to which survey respondents' school/college/trust has made
changes to SEND policy, informed by learning and insight from USS (n=623)
9%
3%
29%
42%
15%
No, but we plan to in the next 12 months
No, but we plan to beyond the next 12 months
No, and we don't plan to
No, this has not changed
Yes, to some extent
Yes, to a great extent
Source: Survey data
Additional analysis indicated that a significantly higher proportion of survey respondents
who had engaged with 4 or more (66%) or 3 activities (65%) reported that changes had
been made to the SEND policy in their setting, compared with those undertook only 1
activity (45%). Furthermore, changes were more likely to have been made in settings
where staff first engaged with USS in the 2021/2022 academic year (66%, compared with
50% of those who started in 2023/2024, and 44% of those who began in 2024/2025).
This suggests that changes in policy take longer to implement and embed than other
changes, such as adaptations to individual practice.
Interviewees and diarists affirmed that changes to SEND policy take longer to implement;
as a result, there is limited evidence of any associated impact at this stage. However, an
SLT diarist in a secondary setting described how their engagement in the Action
Research project with the University of Derby had resulted in changes to their setting's
75
behaviour, which were being trialled within the classroom. The Action Research project
enabled them to focus on the ways in which feedback to children on their behaviour was
provided within their setting. The learning was cascaded to all staff across the setting via
a series of staff meetings, with time built-in for teachers and support staff to consider how
they would apply the learning in the classroom. The staff training was perceived to have
deepened their understanding of how feedback can impact pupils, especially those with
SEND. Staff were given autonomy over the types of alternative approaches and methods
they would trial in their practice, and recorded observations on their effectiveness in a
reflective diary. The new approaches included one-to-one feedback from the teacher or
member of support staff, and giving pupils different options on how they could receive the
feedback. The diarist explained that further meetings with all staff were planned, so that
they could share their findings and policy changes could be agreed.
This allowed teachers and learning assistants autonomy over practice,
and they appreciated the opportunity to shape policy moving forward.
Diarist - SLT, Secondary setting
Staff within a secondary setting reported that, after completing a Big Idea for SEND
project with the Sea View Trust, they created an internal course for teachers. The 6-
session programme provided an overarching introduction to SEND, along with
information about the setting's approach to SEND support. Staff were also given further
reading between sessions. The SENCo perceived that the course had increased staff's
awareness and understanding of different SEND, and the processes in place for
identifying and responding to needs within the setting. As a result, consultations involving
staff, about specific children and young people, were more streamlined and efficient; this
enabled earlier identification and more effective implementation of support provision. A
teacher within the setting described the positive impact the course had on them:
As a teacher, it can be frustrating to be told several times a term to
change your seating plans, or to see a child taken out of lessons for an
intervention, but the training helped me to see the importance of that.
Case study interviewee - Teacher, Secondary setting
Perceived impact of setting-level changes
Prioritisation of SEND needs
Around two-thirds (65%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that as a result
of engaging in USS, the needs of children and young people with SEND were a higher
priority within their setting (Figure 26). Additional analysis revealed that USS was most
impactful for settings where individuals had engaged in 4 or more activities. A
significantly higher proportion of these respondents (42%) strongly agreed that because
of USS, the needs of children and young people with SEND were a higher priority within
76
their setting, compared with those who had only engaged in either 1 (28%) or 2 (26%)
activities.
Figure 26: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Because of
USS, within my school/college/trust the needs of children and young people with
SEND are a higher priority' (n=853)
6%
26%
33%
32%
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
Evidence from case study interviewees and diarists is more limited regarding the extent
to which the needs of children and young people with SEND are a higher priority because
of engagement in USS. However, the following pen portrait describes how engagement
in the ETF College SEND Provider Review has led to changes being implemented, both
in the participant's college and partner campuses.
How the peer review process helped to prioritise SEND
A college group participated in a peer review process involving reciprocal visits with
another institution. During the visits, the focus was on SEND provision, exploring both
strengths and areas for development. The process included staff meetings, a learning
walk, a tour, and lesson observations with particular attention to the support provided
for learners. A report was then produced and discussed with the SLT.
The review informed significant changes to enhance the college experience for
students with SEND. Their needs are now a higher priority - - as reflected in the
appointment of a Director of SEND Inclusion and a Head of Foundation Learning.
This has strengthened leadership, which was previously described as inconsistent.
Practical improvements followed, including the introduction of a sensory room and a
quiet hub; further adaptations are planned, such as repainting the sensory room in
black to optimise its environment.
The peer review had wider impact. Another SLT member noted that the reciprocal
visits prompted a review of SEND provision across the wider college group, leading
to better communication between campuses and a more joined-up approach.
77
Increased capability to respond to needs of children and young people
with SEND
Two-thirds (66%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that because of USS,
there was increased capability to respond to the needs of children and young people with
SEND within their setting (Figure 27). There were no significant differences by setting or
role.
Figure 27: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Because of
USS, within my school/college/trust there is increased capability to respond to the
needs of children and young people with SEND' (n=881)
5%
27%
36%
30%
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
The previous chapter provided evidence that individuals' capability to identify and
respond to the needs of children and young people with SEND had been improved as a
result of engaging in USS. By sharing this learning and insight with the wider workforce
and implementing changes in policy and practice at setting level, some settings' overall
capability to meet their pupils' needs was perceived to have increased. A further example
of increased setting-level capability is a FE setting that engaged in the EFT College
SEND Provider Review; subsequently, the setting developed its processes and support
provision for students with higher-level needs.
I do strongly feel that there's now a strong mechanism in place for staff
to go, 'I've not come across a learner with Down's Syndrome before.
How do I support that learner? I could go and talk to this person. If they
can't help me, they'll point me to one of the team members that can.'
Case study interviewee SLT, Sixth Form/ FE College setting
More inclusive cultures and ethos
Just over two-thirds (67%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that because
of USS there was a more inclusive culture and ethos within their setting (Figure 28).
Further analysis showed that a significantly higher proportion of SENCos (42%) agreed
that their setting's culture and ethos was now more inclusive, compared with those in
support roles (29%). Significantly more respondents who engaged in 4 or more activities
(37%) than 2 activities (24%) strongly agreed that there was a more inclusive culture and
ethos within their setting because of USS.
78
Figure 28: Survey respondents' level of agreement with the statement 'Because of
USS, within my school/college/trust there is a more inclusive culture and ethos'
(n=850)
5%
27%
36%
31%
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
Case study interviewees and several diarists, particularly those in leadership positions,
described how USS had contributed to an improved culture and ethos within their setting.
For example, a secondary-setting participant described how changes implemented,
following internal training inspired by nasen Online CPD Units, led to a more
collaborative, whole-school approach to supporting children and young people with
SEND.
There's been such a shift. I think previously, some of our more
established members of staff saw SEND students as a 'problem' and that
they were to be 'dealt' with by the SEND team. And now, that culture
does not exist here at all. Case study interviewee - SLT, Secondary
setting
In another example, engagement in the ETF College SEND Provider Review resulted in
the appointment of a Director of SEND and Inclusion. This new post was instrumental in
increasing knowledge and understanding, and driving changes in attitudes to SEND -
thus creating a more inclusive and supportive culture:
I think the whole culture, for every campus and every department, has
changed now compared with where it was previously. I remember
walking around and asking staff if they knew how many EHCPs or high-
needs students they had in their class, and they couldn't answer. And
now you go in and they will just reel it off. Case study interviewee - SLT,
Sixth Form/FE College setting
There is evidence that USS had helped settings to adopt more consistent policies and
approaches for supporting children and young people with SEND:
Wider outcomes included an increase in staff awareness and a more
unified approach to SEND across the school. The USS training has
encouraged ongoing discussions on best practices, which we anticipate
will continue to enhance our SEND provision in the long term. - Diarist,
SLT, College setting
79
This greater consistency was perceived to foster more inclusive environments:
The team's shared understanding of inclusive strategies also
strengthened communication and collective problem-solving, creating a
more cohesive support network for our learners. - Diarist, SLT, Sixth
Form/FE College setting
USS was also reported to have inspired changes to the physical environment in some
settings, which have made them more inclusive for children and young people with
SEND. For example, an SLT college case study interviewee remarked that engagement
in the nasen Online CPD Units, as well as ETF activities, had prompted conversations
about the college environment's suitability for students with SEND. As a result, changes
were made to reduce the level of noise in the reception foyer at one of the campuses, to
ensure students were not overstimulated on arrival.
There's always music, there's always loud places and a banging radio in
reception. We turned it off. Even our principal said, 'We've been doing
this for 15 years, nobody has ever said to us, why is that on?' You can
see some students shrinking away and then learning support staff having
to work harder and harder because of that stimulated environment. Case
study interviewee - SLT, Sixth form/ FE College setting
80
Building a more inclusive culture in a primary setting
A rural three-form entry junior school first engaged with USS in response to a growing
number of pupils with a wide range of SEND. Leaders recognised the need to
strengthen their whole-school approach, including how they supported pupils through
the transition to secondary school. All staff undertook AET training; senior leaders,
teachers and support staff also completed nasen's Online CPD Units. The SENCo
accessed nasen Webinars and shared insights with colleagues across the school.
At the whole-school level, staff drew on their training to make learning environments
calmer and more inclusive. Every classroom was adapted to reduce clutter. Weekly
planning sessions were introduced to help pupils and staff prepare for events and
ensure appropriate support was in place (e.g., ear defenders for large gatherings).
Interviewees also described changes in practice. An SLT member explained they had
reflected on their presentation style and adapted their tone of voice and body
language. A member of support staff reported changes to their approach, such as
repeating instructions to give pupils more time to process them, and tailoring
interventions to individual need.
Learning and insight from USS was also perceived to have helped embed a more
inclusive culture and ethos within the setting. Interviewees described a shift in staff
attitudes towards SEND, including a willingness to view behaviour through a different
lens, and a stronger focus on nurturing, supportive relationships. The SENCo
highlighted that the nasen Online Units on Behaviour were particularly influential in
driving this change:
We were already on our path to developing a fully inclusive approach,
but engaging in USS training has given us an explicit way forward.
Case study interviewee - SLT, Primary setting
81
Chapter 7: Impact on children and young people
The goal of USS is to improve outcomes for children and young people with SEND, so
that they are able to attain and successfully transition through education and training into
sustainable employment in the long term. This chapter considers the extent to which
USS-informed adaptations to teaching and support practice, along with emerging
changes to policy, culture and ethos at a setting level, have resulted in better outcomes
for children and young people with SEND. As to measure impacts on children and young
people within the scope of this evaluation, evidence is based on the perceptions and
observations of delegates and colleagues within their settings.
Student belonging, and enjoyment and engagement in school
or college life
Two-thirds of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that adaptations to teaching
and support practice, informed by USS, had improved children and young people's sense
of belonging (66%). Three-fifths (60%) also agreed or strongly agreed that children and
young people's enjoyment of school/college had been enhanced. Just over half (54%)
agreed or strongly agreed that adaptations to teaching and supported practice had
increased pupils' engagement in wider school/college life (Figure 29).
Figure 29: Teacher survey respondents' level of agreement that adaptions to
teaching and support practice informed by USS have improved the following
outcomes for children and young people in their school/college/trust
Sense of belonging
4%
29%
41%
25%
(n=705)
Enjoyment of school/college
5%
34%
39%
21%
(n=688)
Engagement in wider school/college life
9%
34%
33%
21%
(n=595)
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
Case study interviewees provided some emerging evidence, particularly in secondary
settings, that changes across settings have improved children and young people's
enjoyment of school or college. For example, an SLT interviewee in a secondary setting
observed that engagement in the nasen Online CPD Units had increased staff's
knowledge about the different types of SEND. As a result, staff were adapting their
82
practice and implementing more inclusive language. The leader observed that students
appeared to be more engaged in their learning and were enjoying school more because
of this.
There's been a big shift in understanding among staff. We see happier
young people enjoying school. Interviewee - SLT, Secondary setting
In another example, a SENCo in a secondary setting described how engaging with the
nasen Professional Development Groups and online CPD modules had helped staff to
embed knowledge on safe spaces for children and young people with SEND in their
setting. The SENCo drew on this insight to deliver short, bite-sized staff training sessions,
and designed a SEN space within the school. The SENCo explained that these changes
had improved children and young peoples' engagement in school life, particularly those
with SEND. In some instances, as a result of the more tailored support provision offered,
some students have felt confident enough to stop using the SEN space.
I think for the students, the work that we've done around the emotionally
supportive spaces has been really powerful. It's really nice when they
stop using them; you know that they've found their feet. It's really good to
see them leave the safe spaces we create, because that is a really good
indicator of success. Interviewee - SENCo, Secondary setting
Teacher and student relationships
Nearly three-quarters (72%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that
adaptions to teaching and support practice, informed by USS, have improved teacher-
student relationships within their setting (Figure 30). Additional analysis revealed that a
significantly higher proportion of teachers (38%) than SENCos (20%) strongly agreed
that these adaptions had improved teacher-student relationships within their setting.
Figure 30: Teacher survey respondents' level of agreement that adaptions to
teaching and support practice informed by USS have improved teacher and
student relationships for children and young people in their school/college/trust
(n=738)
4%
24%
45%
27%
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
83
Insight from 2 diarists in teaching roles suggested that changes to teaching practice
and/or the classroom environment, informed by USS, had led to improved relationships
with students. For example, a teacher at a secondary setting detailed how they used the
nasen Online CPD Units on Creating an Emotionally Safe Environment to modify their
classroom layout. Introducing motivational posters on the classroom walls prompted
discussions with the students about how to deal with different situations. Adding personal
touches to the classroom also encouraged informal discussions, which further improved
the relationship between the teacher and the class.
I think the changes made to the classroom have helped students build a
rapport with me faster, as well as feel more comfortable around me. This
has made my provision much more effective. Diarist - Teacher,
Secondary setting
In a further example, a support staff member in a primary setting implemented the
PACE⁴⁶ approach following USS training, to support a student's more positive
interactions with adults. This approach provided a framework that enabled the support
staff member to acknowledge and validate the student's emotions. The student
subsequently became less anxious and was able to remain at school for the whole day,
which they had previously been unable to do.
Initially, the pupil did not want to speak to me. I followed a PACE
approach, explaining that I could see they were feeling strong emotions
and that I would just stay in the hall with them to make sure they were
safe. This seemed to help, and the pupil seemed less anxious.
I
continued with this approach and the pupil was able to regulate their
emotions. Diarist - Support staff, Primary setting
Student motivation and engagement in learning
Around three-fifths of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that adaptations to
teaching and support practice, informed by USS, had improved children and young
people's motivation (61%) and engagement in learning (61%) (Figure 31).
46 PACE stands for Playfulness, Acceptance, Curiosity and Empathy; this is a model that enables
practitioners to create a safe and trusting environment.
84
Figure 31: Teacher survey respondents' level of agreement that adaptions to
teaching and support practice informed by USS have improved the following
outcomes for children and young people in their school/college/trust
Motivation (n=708)
5%
34%
41%
20%
Engagement in learning
4%
34%
40%
21%
(n=723)
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
A diarist in a support role described how insight from a nasen Online CPD Unit on
Creating Emotionally Safe Environments had informed changes to their classroom
environment. These changes were perceived to have improved pupils' motivation and
engagement in their learning. In this instance, the support staff member ran an
intervention for a particular student, who was identified as disengaged from class
activities. The student disclosed they had been ridiculed by other students during
lessons, which had made them withdraw from school life. The support staff member
worked with the class teacher to facilitate a group discussion about how their classroom
was a safe and supportive environment for all students. This led all students to feel more
comfortable about contributing in class.
The outcome for the class teacher was that their students now feel more
emotionally safe in their classroom and will contribute to lessons more. I
believe there are positive outcomes for the students in the class,
including feeling more relaxed, [that it's] safer to make mistakes and
explore their thought processes and answers in a more relaxed way.
Diarist - Support staff, Sixth Form/FE College setting
Another SLT diarist in a college setting applied insight from USS during a staff meeting
about classroom communication strategies for students with autism. Teaching and
support staff participated in the meeting, which considered ways to reduce sensory
overload for students - including the creation of quiet zones and sensory breaks. These
strategies were subsequently implemented within the classroom; staff perceived that they
had improved student engagement in learning.
I observed that students who previously struggled with emotional
regulation were calmer and more willing to participate in lessons. Diarist
- SLT, Sixth Form/FE College setting
85
The pen portrait below describes how a diarist in a primary setting applied learning from
their Action Research project to improve support, for a child to engage more effectively in
lessons.
Using insight from an Action Research project to develop play and
communication skills
A member of support staff at a two-form entry primary setting engaged with the Action
Research project to enhance support provision for a preverbal pupil. They described
how they applied strategies learned during their training, with the aim of developing
the child's play and communication skills.
The staff member adapted their interaction with the child based upon whether they
were under- or over-stimulated. They also used videos of songs to help contextualise
the learning environment. For example, alongside playing with a Noah's Ark toy set,
they showed the child the video for the song 'The Animals Went in Two by Two' to
provide meaning to the play. The diarist perceived that the introduction of the video
prevented the child from reverting to their usual repetitive behaviour of lining up new
toys.
As a result of the adjusted interaction strategy, the child sustained a focus on the
activities for 5-10 minutes and held their attention on other activities for up to 20
minutes. Increased engagement with the activity also improved the child's
communication, as the support staff member observed the child pointing and clicking
their lips as if to vocalise the names of the characters in the play set. The sustained
focus helped the child transition to other activities.
Because of the child's sustained focus, I was able to switch from a
play activity to a learning activity without having to give the child a
break, as I had to do in the past. Diarist - Support staff, Primary
setting
Student behaviour
Nearly three-fifths (57%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that adaptions
to teaching and support practice, informed by USS, had improved student behaviour within
their setting (Figure 32). Further analysis showed that a significantly higher proportion of
respondents from classroom teachers/EY practitioners (27%) than SENCos (14%) strongly
agreed that adaptions had improved student behaviour within their setting.
86
Figure 32: Teacher survey respondents' level of agreement that adaptions to
teaching and support practice informed by USS have improved behaviour for
children and young people in their school/college/trust (n=713)
6%
36%
37%
19%
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
Two diarists observed improved behaviour among individual students and in wider
classroom environments. For example, a diarist in a primary-setting teaching role
outlined how engaging with the nasen Online CPD Unit on Understanding Behaviour had
helped them to appreciate that poor behaviour can be a form of communication. The
teacher observed the student's behaviour in order to understand triggers, and identified
that the student found noise difficult, during transitions between classes and at
break/lunchtimes. Implementing a visual schedule for the pupil and allowing them to
change their routine resulted in reduced disruptive behaviour: they became calmer, more
comfortable and confident. The support in place for this child had a positive impact for
other students, as there were fewer disruptions in class. This enabled all students to
engage more effectively in their learning.
The child now transitions more smoothly, with less anxiety, and can
focus better when entering a new activity. Diarist - Teacher, Primary
setting
A SLT diarist in a primary setting detailed how they had applied the AET training on
autism in their classroom setting, which led to a calmer environment and improved
student behaviour, as shown below.
87
Using the AET environmental checklist to create positive learning
environments
An SLT member of staff at a single-form primary setting used the Environmental
Checklist from the AET practical support pack on Understanding Autism and Anxiety
in Schools. The setting wanted to better understand how a particular classroom
looked through the eyes of the children.
The diarist remarked how the tool revealed how cluttered the classroom environment
was, with a lack of clear wall space. As a result, students were identified as feeling
potentially claustrophobic. They reorganised the space and moved posters and other
materials into the store cupboard.
After completing the checklist again, the diarist recorded a much more positive result.
With the classroom less visually stimulating, the students appeared calmer. This
checklist was shared across the setting, and they have decided to assess every area
with it. The diarist explained how teachers will be expected to complete it for their own
classroom every half-term.
Peer-to-peer relationships
Nearly three-fifths (56%) of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that adaptions
to teaching and support practice, informed by USS, had improved peer-to-peer
relationships within their setting (Figure 33).
Figure 33: Teacher survey respondents' level of agreement that adaptions to
teaching and support practice informed by USS have improved peer-to-peer
relationships for children and young people in their school/college/trust (n=675)
6%
37%
36%
20%
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
Few case study interviewees or diarists detailed changes in outcomes related peer-to-
peer relationships. However, one diarist in a support role at a college setting reported
that the learning from a nasen Spotlight Activity on Executive Function enabled them to
have a one-to-one session with an autistic student, who was aggrieved that their peers
had not contributed to a group activity. The diarist encouraged the student to engage in
88
critical thinking; they were subsequently able to resolve the situation with their peers and
felt less frustrated.
I believe my intervention worked well, as it allowed the student to
critically reflect on their situation and identify a way forward. Diarist -
Support, Sixth Form/FE College setting
Attainment and attendance
Around half of survey respondents agreed or strongly agreed that adaptations to teaching
and support practice, informed by USS, had improved children and young people's
attainment (54%) and attendance (50%) (Figure 34).
Figure 34: Teacher survey respondents' level of agreement that adaptions to
teaching and support practice informed by USS have improved the following
outcomes for children and young people in their school/college/trust
Attainment (n=627)
5%
40%
35%
19%
Attendance (n=603)
8%
39%
32%
18%
1 - Strongly disagree
2
3
4
5 - Strongly agree
Source: Survey data
Changes in patterns of attendance and attainment take time to emerge and can be
influenced by a number of factors in addition to a young person's experience at school.
Case study interviewees and diarists provided few examples of how adaptations
informed by USS had impacted these outcomes. In a case study of a college that had
engaged with the ETF College SEND Provider Review, interviewees described how this
informed a review of their transition process for students identified as having complex
needs. The college subsequently revised its approach. Students are now able to visit the
college several times before they start their course, and internal staff training is provided
for the curriculum support team, regarding students' support requirement. As a result of
the changes, fewer students with SEND have withdrawn from their chosen course, and
their achievement is also perceived to have improved.
89
More students stay on their programme and achieve. Our high-needs
students have stronger attendance and a higher achievement rate than
those who are not high-needs. The changes made to our transition
approach has improved our achievement rate, and our retention rate, so
that's really positive. Case study interviewee - SLT, Sixth Form/FE
College setting
90
Chapter 7: Conclusion
USS comprises a suite of CPD activities and resources for the school and FE workforce,
predominantly in mainstream settings. Developed by nasen, ETF and AET, the offer
ranges in focus and intensity; it is designed to complement a broader SEND CPD offer,
which includes mandatory qualifications for SENCos. USS aims to improve the quality of
mainstream support for children and young people with SEND by enhancing staff's
knowledge, skills, and confidence to identify and respond to a broad range of SEND
earlier and more effectively. The programme is also intended to support settings in
developing inclusive, whole-school approaches. Since its launch, USS has evolved in
response to changes in policy and workforce needs.
A theory of change provided the framework for the process and impact evaluation of
USS, which explored the programme's reach and effectiveness - along with perceived
impacts on the quality of teaching and support practice, and outcomes for young people.
The findings presented in this report draw on MI and primary quantitative and qualitative
data to address the key research questions set out below. Although based on the views
and experiences of a relatively small proportion⁴⁷ of the delegates who engaged with
USS, the evaluation provides useful insight into how USS has supported the professional
development of the education workforce, and shaped policy and practice in a range of
settings.
Based on the evidence, it is possible to conclude that USS has contributed to
improvements in the quality of mainstream provision of support for children and young
people with SEND, in settings that have engaged with the programme. Enhanced support
provision, along with wider changes inspired by learning and insight from USS, are
helping to foster more inclusive cultures. These changes have the potential to improve
outcomes for children and young people with SEND in the long term; but evidence of this
is, to date, more limited.
How did the mainstream school and college workforce engage
with USS?
Engagement in USS was high, with almost three-quarters of schools and colleges having
some type of engagement with the programme annually. Importantly, for 70% of survey
respondents, USS was the only source of CPD they had engaged in since the
programme launched in 2022. This suggests that the programme addressed gaps in
SEND CPD through its unique offer of diverse, flexible and bite-sized provision.
47 Leaders, SENCos and support staff are over-represented and teaching staff are under-represented in the
sample of respondents who completed the survey, when compared with the characteristics of delegates
captured in the MI.
91
Engagement was highest from those in teaching and support roles, who had typically
engaged in 1 activity. This indicates that most delegates engage with USS to address
specific needs. Fewer senior leaders, including SENCos, engaged with the programme
compared with other staff roles, and they typically participated in fewer interventions.
However, when this group did engage, they often took part in more intensive
interventions designed to drive strategic change. It is important to recognise that leaders
were most likely to have engaged in wider SEND training and CPD, including mandatory
qualifications (NASENCO and NPQs) and training and support in specific SEND (e.g.,
PINS), in addition to USS. Therefore, USS is one of a number of factors that contribute to
changes in outcomes at a setting level.
Is USS well-designed, targeted and delivered?
Although delegates did not widely recognise the USS 'brand', the quality of its content
and the diversity of provision were regarded as key strengths. Facilitators were perceived
to be knowledgeable and engaging, and the credibility of the resources was enhanced by
the underpinning evidence base. The content could often be tailored or applied to
address the needs of individuals and/or their settings.
The flexibility and accessibility of the offer were further strengths. Delegates valued the
opportunity to engage with the resources at a time and in a way that worked for them.
Online delivery and self-paced provision were particularly valued by SENCos and
leaders, who could integrate the training into their busy schedules. Live, interactive
activities such as the peer reviews and action research were valued by senior leaders in
sixth form/FE college settings, because they offered opportunities to network and share
best practice. For those who had engaged in other training on SEND, the depth and
breadth of most USS provision was perceived to be comparable to these other training
offers.
USS successfully engaged participants across all phases, which suggests that the CPD
and training was appropriately differentiated. Engagement was highest among primary
settings, followed by secondary, early years, and sixth form/FE colleges. Staff from
specialist and other settings also engaged in USS, although they were not the primary
target audience for the programme.
Does USS work to improve teaching practice?
USS had a positive impact on teaching and support practice across all roles and settings.
It was particularly impactful in developing individuals' knowledge, skills and confidence,
especially when participants engaged in a higher number of activities. This enabled
individuals to identify SEND needs among the children and young people they support,
and to develop strategies for adapting their teaching practice in response.
92
The training was particularly impactful for those in teaching and support roles.
Furthermore, these staff have shared the learning and insight with their peers, thus
enhancing the capability of others in similar roles to respond to the needs of children and
young people with SEND. There is some evidence that changes in policy, processes and
practices informed by USS have enabled the needs of children and young people with
SEND to be identified earlier. In some cases, staff have increased their confidence in
liaising with parents/carers and other professionals, in order to enable earlier
identification of need, as well as to help shape support provision.
USS has impacted on the practice of leaders and SENCos to a lesser extent. However,
those in senior positions have drawn on USS to develop and strengthen internal CPD
provision, so that learning and insight is cascaded to their wider workforce. Most leaders
and SENCos have also shared their learning with other senior leaders. Evidence of
impact at a whole-school level has emerged primarily in those schools where senior
leaders first engaged with the programme soon after it launched. Changes at the setting
level driven by USS primarily focus on teaching and support practice. There is some
evidence of wider adaptions to the physical environment; however, changes in SEND
policies and processes to take more time to embed and were less common.
The nature and depth of the impact of changes varies according to existing challenges,
structures and priorities across different settings. Primary settings have made the
greatest adaptations to teaching practice and pastoral support. While secondary settings
have started to implement changes, this has often been at a slower pace. Sixth form and
FE colleges have made strategic and structural changes, including in one case
appointing a dedicated SEND leadership role. A key aim of USS is to enhance transitions
for children and young people with SEND; there is evidence of notable improvements in
transition processes and support for those moving from Year 6 to 7 and from Year 11 to
post-16 opportunities, informed by the programme.
Are more children and young people with SEND having their
needs met, and have their outcomes improved since USS was
rolled out?
A longer-term ambition of USS, set out in the theory of change, was to improve outcomes
for children and young people with SEND. The evidence regarding these distal outcomes
is currently limited, although there are indications that USS has contributed to progress
towards these goals. Many settings were still in the early stages of embedding learning
and implementing changes; nevertheless, an improved sense of belonging and
enjoyment of school were attributed to more inclusive teaching practices and classroom
environments, particularly in secondary settings. Adjustments to communication
strategies, especially for pupils with autism, had increased motivation and engagement in
learning. Enhanced staff understanding of pupils' needs, and the provision of emotionally
93
safe environments, have contributed to stronger teacher-student relationships and trust.
Staff have also applied their learning from USS to better understand student behaviour;
this has led to calmer and more focused classroom environments, which enable all
students to engage, and support attainment. Where individual sixth form/FE colleges
have implemented insight from more intensive USS activities to enhance the transition
from Year 11, attendance is reported to have increased, fewer students have withdrawn
from their courses, and achievement has improved as a result.
Areas for consideration
Based on insight from this evaluation, USS's impact on the mainstream support and
outcomes for children and young people with SEND could be maximised by:
greater engagement by strategic leaders with the power to implement change at the
whole-setting level
clearer branding and improved signposting to introductory, intermediate and
advanced content, to ensure training is matched to individuals' existing level of
knowledge and skills, the requirements of their role, and/or current challenges within
their setting
enhancing the content of the training to include more practical, context-specific
examples and interactive elements
supporting individuals to draw on the range of training and resources available
through USS, in order to develop a coherent programme of CPD which sustains their
engagement, in line with the DfE standards for teachers' professional development
collecting and sharing examples of effective whole-school change and evidence of
impact on pupil outcomes
94
Appendix 1: Evaluation methodology
Approach
The evaluation of the USS programme adopted a mixed-methods approach, combining
both secondary and primary research. USS providers (nasen, AET and ETF) collected
secondary data, in the form of MI, and supplied it to CFE. The primary research included
a survey of USS programme delegates, as well as case study interviews and diaries.
Each of these methods is explored in more detail below.
The evaluation employed a theory-based approach, consistent with guidance from the
UK Government's Magenta Book.⁴⁸ This approach is well suited to the USS programme,
which operates within a complex policy landscape, while outcomes change over time and
cannot be predicted at the outset. This approach is also suitable given the absence of a
formal comparator or control group. A theory of change (ToC) underpinned the
evaluation, to test fulfilment of the programme's objectives. The ToC outlined the key
inputs and activities central to the USS programme, and mapped the intended outcomes
and impacts for delegates, education settings and pupils (see Appendix 2). The research
methods were designed to test the ToC and gather evidence regarding the programme's
contribution to achieving its short-term outcomes and overall impact.
An indicator bank was developed to specify the metrics used to assess the programme's
impact. Both the ToC and the indicator bank were instrumental in shaping the research
tools used throughout the evaluation.
Management information
The core providers of USS (including nasen, AET and ETF) collected the MI for the
period spanning the 2021/2022 and 2024/2025 academic years. The focus of the MI was
to understand the programme reach, including levels of engagement. The providers
supplied the MI to CFE in March and April 2025 as 3 separate datasets, which were then
merged. The MI recorded the number of engagements in the training. Each provider
inserted a pseudonymised identifier, to enable the number of unique individual delegates
who participated in USS activity to be calculated for each provider. However, the
pseudonymised identifiers were not transferable across the datasets, which meant it was
not possible to link them at the individual level; as such, there were likely to be duplicates
between the 3 MI datasets.
While there were similar variables in each of the 3 datasets (including fields regarding
delegates' role, setting, geographical location, and the type of training they had engaged
48 More detail can be found in the Magenta Book: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-
magenta-book
95
in), the AET MI data was recorded using 2 different formats, forming two separate
datasets:
aggregate counts of delegates at each training session. These counts included
data fields for session date and region
individual delegate data collected via feedback forms, including fields for delegate
setting and role. Individual delegate data represented around 50% of the
aggregate counts
Both AET datasets have been used in this report. The aggregate counts informed the
programme's reach, while the individual delegate data contributed to understanding
delegates' characteristics.
Further data cleaning and processing was undertaken by CFE to ensure consistency
across all MI datasets, as well as comparability with the survey data. This primarily
involved delegates' role and setting, with assumptions made when deriving the
classification system and coding of educational settings and roles.
The USS activities within in the MI were coded to reflect those utilised within the survey. 49
Appendix 3 provides more details of how the USS activities within the MI reflect those
included in the survey of programme delegates.
It was originally intended to use the MI to create the survey sampling frame, and to link
survey responses at the individual level. However, at the outset of the programme, due to
data sharing restrictions, it was not possible to share data at the individual level. This
meant that the MI and survey data were analysed separately. The report's main analysis
of the MI considered the number of individual delegates who engaged in the training,
number of engagements by academic year (2021/2022, 2022/2023, 2023/2024,
2024/2025), regional coverage, as well as delegates' role and setting.
Survey of programme delegates
A survey of programme delegates was designed to supplement the MI, this included
questions relating to:
delegates' characteristics (e.g., role, setting, length in role, SEND responsibilities)
USS activities engaged in, and their usefulness
delegates' views and experiences of USS
perceived impacts of USS on individual practice
49 The MI does not include any data relating to the following activities included in the survey: Peer
Mentoring Support for School Leaders (nasen), Downloadable Resources (nasen), Action Research
(University of Derby), Lesson Study (University of Derby), and Big Idea for SEND (Sea View Trust).
96
perceived impacts of USS on educational settings' approaches to supporting
children and young people with SEND
perceived impacts of USS on pupil outcomes
The survey was disseminated on 3 separate occasions, to maximise coverage across the
duration of the programme. These were:
On-programme and impact survey (January 2024 to March 2024):
Disseminated to delegates who first participated in the programme between April
2022 and March 2024. Those who had engaged between April 2022 and July
2023 were asked all questions, including questions relating to perceived impacts
(n=519). For those who engaged first in the 2023/2024 academic year, the survey
asked about their experiences of USS only (n=154).
On-programme survey only (September 2024 to October 2024): Disseminated
to capture perceptions from additional delegates who had engaged in the
programme since January 2024 (n=256). The survey did not ask delegates about
their perceived impacts of the programme.
On-programme and impact survey (February 2025 to April 2025): Disseminated
to all delegates who had engaged in the programme since April 2022, to capture
insight from additional delegates who had participated in the training, and
perceptions about impact (n=731), since October 2024.
In total, there were 1,660 usable responses to the survey. Table 10 presents a
breakdown of survey responses by each fieldwork period.
Table 10: Breakdown of survey responses by fieldwork period
Fieldwork period
Number of usable
Proportion of
responses
usable responses
January 2024 - March 2024
673
41%
September 2024 - October 2024
256
15%
February 2025 - April 2025
731
44%
Total
1,660
100%
Survey links were disseminated directly to delegates via nasen and ETF. Nasen also
delivered survey links to delegates who had engaged with the training from the University
of Derby and Sea View Trust. To reflect the AET's delivery model, unique survey links
were sent to delegates via each local authority. AET developed a central registration
97
portal prior to the final fieldwork period, which enabled the AET survey links to be
disseminated directly to delegates.
The characteristics of survey respondents did not fully reflect those in the MI. Analysis
was conducted to explore the representativeness of the samples. Several significant
differences were found between the MI and survey data:
more individuals in the MI were from primary (57%) and early years (9%) settings
than in the survey (41%; 6%)
more survey respondents were from secondary (20%) and sixth form/FE colleges
(19%) settings than in the MI (16%; 4%)
more survey respondents were from leadership (23%) or SENCo (28%) roles than
in the MI (4%; 7%)
more individuals in the MI were from teaching (42%) and support (36%) roles than
in the survey (15%; 27%)
As the survey was snowballed to delegates via the training providers and there were no
unique individual links, it is possible that there were duplicated responses to the survey.
Survey data from all 3 fieldwork periods were merged and top-line analysis was
conducted, followed by column proportion z-tests, to explore the any associations
between different respondent and setting characteristics.
Qualitative research
Two qualitative methods were used to further supplement the survey findings to
understand how USS has helped the education workforce in the following ways:
how individuals acquire knowledge, skills and confidence to effectively identify and
respond to the needs of children and young people with SEND
how settings have used the learning and insight from USS to drive change in
attitudes and approaches to SEND at the whole-school/college/trust level, thereby
fostering more inclusive cultures
how adaptations to teaching and support practice have resulted in perceived
improvement in the outcomes of children and young people
Case study interviews
Seven case studies, comprising a total of 17 interviews were undertaken with programme
delegates and wider staff across all settings, in order to gain insight and learning about
how USS has been shared to drive change at a whole-setting level. A recall question was
included in the survey. Case studies were selected from those who consented to
recontact. The sample took into account setting and role, and the volume of USS
activities and resources that delegates had engaged with.
98
Of the 17 delegates and wider staff interviewed, 3 were from primary settings, 1 was from
a secondary setting, and 3 were from sixth form/FE college settings. Case studies were
undertaken after each survey fieldwork period.
A further 5 interviews were carried out with delegates from secondary settings between
June and July 2025, to ensure equivalent coverage across all educational settings.
Diary entries
Programme delegates completed reflective diaries over a period of 6 weeks,
documenting up to 3 weekly examples of how they applied USS learning in their roles.
Diarists were also asked to reflect on any enablers or barriers they faced while
implementing their training, as well as any perceived outcomes for themselves, their
wider setting, or children and young people. Similar to interviewees, diarists were
recruited via a survey recontact question, and selected based on setting and role, after all
phases of the survey dissemination.
In total, 34 individual delegates completed their diary entries, split by the following
settings: 2 early years settings, 14 primary settings, 10 secondary schools, 7 sixth
form/FE college settings, and 1 all-through school.
All interviews and diary entries were coded thematically, guided by the ToC and
associated indicator bank.
99
Appendix 2: Theory of change step-by-step
There follows a theory of change diagram for Universal SEND that charts how inputs
feed into activities, which feed into outputs, outcomes (short to medium term) and
impacts (medium to long term).
A distinction is made between short- to medium-term outcomes that are in scope for
being measured in the evaluation, and longer-term outcomes/impacts which are out of
scope from being measured as likely occurring outside the evaluation time frame.
Inputs include:
1. £11.76 million funding.
2. A delivery contract (between nasen, ETF, AET and DfE).
3. Infrastructure, systems and processes, including facilitators, centres of excellence,
peer mentors, community networks, professional development.
4. Resources including training materials and personnel and capacity.
5. Comms and marketing.
These would feed into in the following activities:
1. Online CPD units.
2. Online networking sessions and webinars.
3. Autism CPD and resources.
4. SEND handbook and resources.
5. Professional development groups.
6. Peer reviews.
7. Peer mentoring.
8. Action research and lesson study.
9. Big Ideas for SEND project.
10. Community networks.
These activities would result in the following measurable outputs:
1. Number of staff engaging in CPD to support children and young people with
SEND.
2. Characteristics of staff trained in CPD to support children and young people with
SEND.
3. Geographical reach of CPD to support children and young people with SEND.
4. Educational settings of the staff trained in CPD to support children and young peo-
ple with SEND.
These outputs would result in the following measurable short-term outcomes:
1. An increase in SEND knowledge among staff.
2. An increase in skills among staff to respond to SEND.
3. Staff better able to adapt teaching practice to respond to the needs of children and
young people with SEND.
100
4. An increase in staff confidence in their ability to identify SEND among children and
young people. This would, in turn, lead to earlier identification of SEND among
children and young people.
5. Staff are more confident to liaise with parents, carers and other professionals
about children's and young people's SEND. This would, in turn, result in improved
job satisfaction.
Medium-term measurable outcomes would include:
1. Increased SEND knowledge, skills and confidence, resulting in SEND knowledge
and skills being embedded across schools, colleges and trusts, including to SLT.
This, in turn, results in increased capacity to respond to the needs of children and
young people with SEND.
2. This, and staff ability to adapt their teaching practice, results in improved quality of
teaching and learning.
3. Embedded knowledge and skills across the setting results in:
a. schools, colleges and trusts enhancing SEND policy
b. SEND resources being mobilised across the school, college, trust or MAT
C. A more inclusive culture and ethos having been developed across the
school, college or trust
4. Improved capacity to respond to SEND needs and improved quality of teaching
and learning result in an enhanced classroom climate for all children and young
people.
5. Improved job satisfaction results in increased staff retention.
These short- and medium-term outcomes would result in the following long-
term outcomes (not in scope for this evaluation, as they fell outside the
timeframe of the research):
1. An enhanced SEND policy, mobilisation of resources and inclusive culture and
ethos mean children and young people with SEND have:
a. a more positive experience of education
b. an improved sense of belonging
C. improved mental health and wellbeing
2. This, in turn, along with an enhanced classroom climate for all children and young
people, results in:
a. improved attendance for children and young people with SEND
b. a better ability for them to access the curriculum and engage with their
learning
C. an increase in children's and young people's attainment
3. This, in turn, along with improved staff confidence at liaising with parents and car-
ers and with other professionals, results in parents and carers who are more satis-
fied that the needs of children and young people with SEND are being met within
mainstream settings.
4. This, in turn, results in an increase in children and young people with SEND who
can remain in a mainstream setting.
101
5. More positive experiences, an improved sense of belonging and mental health, im-
proved school or college attendance, better ability to access the curriculum and
engage in learning, and increased attainment among children and young people
with SEND result in an increase in children and young people with SEND who
make successful transitions at each stage of education.
6. This, in turn, would result in:
a. improved employment outcomes for young people with SEND
b. a reduction in the number of young people with SEND who need to claim
unemployment benefits
C. improved lifetime outcomes for children and young people with SEND
102
Appendix 2: Theory of change diagram
Inputs
Activities
Outputs
Outcomes
Distinction between outcomes in scope
for the current USEND evaluation and
Impacts
What will be achieved in the short to medium term
longer-term outcomes/impacts.
What will be achieved in the medium to long term
£11.76 million
in SEND knowledge
School/college/trust
CYP with SEND have a
funding from
amongst staff
leadership enhance
more positive
DfE
no. of staff
SEND
SEND policy
experience of education
engaging in
knowledge and
Delivery
CPD for CYP
skills amongst staff
skills are
SEND resources are
with SEND
to respond to SEND
embedded
mobilised across
Improved sense of
contract
A1: Online CPD
needs
across
school/college/trust/
belonging among CYP
(Nasen, ETF,
units
with SEND
AET)
school/college/
MAT
A2: Online
in staffs' confidence
trust including
More inclusive culture
to SLT
Networking
in their ability to identify
and ethos developed
Improved mental health
Infrastructure
sessions and
SEND needs amongst
across school
and wellbeing among
and systems
webinars
CYP
/college/trust
CYP with SEND
and
processes
B1: Autism CPD
in CYP who make
including:
and resources
successful transitions
Characteristics
Improved assessment
of staff trained
at each stage of
Facilitators
A10: SEND
of SEND provision by
education
in SEND CPD
handbook and
Ofsted
Improved school/college
for CYP
Centres for
attendance for CYP with
resources
Excellence
capacity to
SEND
respond CYP's
A3: Professional
SEND needs
Peer Mentors
Development
Earlier identification of
CYP with SEND better
groups
SEND needs amongst
able to access the
Community
CYP
curriculum and engage
Networks
A4: Peer
in their learning
Improved employment
Reviews
Classroom climate is
outcomes for YP with
Professional
enhanced for all CYP
Development
A5: Peer
Staff better able to adapt
Quality of
SEND
Geographical
mentoring
reach of SEND
teaching practice to
teaching and
in attainment of CYP
respond to the needs of
learning
CPD for CYP
Reduction in the
A7: Action
CYP with SEND
improves
number of YP with
Resources
Research and
SEND who need to
including
Lesson Study
claim unemployment
training
Staff are more confident
Parents/carers are
benefits
materials and
A8: BIG ideas
to liaise with
more satisfied that
personnel/
for SEND
parents/carers and
CYP's SEND needs
project
other professionals
are met within
Improved lifetime
capacity
about CYP's SEND
mainstream settings
outcomes for CYP with
A9: Community
SEND
needs
Networks
Educational
settings of the
staff trained in
SEND CPD for
in CYP with SEND
Comms and
CYP
who can remain in a
marketing
Improved staff job
mainstream setting
satisfaction
staff retention
Appendix 3: Activities offered
Table 11: Correspondence of activity type categories between MI and survey data
MI activity type category
Corresponding survey category
AET activity
Autism Training - AET
ETF College SEND Review
College SEND Provider Review - ETF
ETF Communities of Practice
Community of Practice - ETF
ETF SEND Events
Webinar or Live Sessions - ETF
nasen Online Units
Online CPD Units - WSS/nasen
nasen Live Discussions
Live Discussion Session - WSS/nasen
nasen Live Discussions
Specialist Spotlight: Live Sessions -
WSS/nasen
nasen Responsive Webinars
Live Webinars - WSS/nasen
nasen PD Groups
Professional Development Groups -
WSS/nasen
nasen Preparation for Adulthood
Preparation for Adulthood from the Earliest
Years Self Review Training - WSS/nasen
N/A
Peer Mentoring Support for School Leaders -
WSS/nasen
N/A
Downloadable resources - e.g., Teacher
Handbook; SEND - WSS/nasen
N/A
Big Idea for SEND - Sea View Trust
N/A
Action Research - University of Derby
N/A
Lesson Study - University of Derby
Appendix 4: Data tables
Table 12: Survey respondents' educational setting
Setting
Individuals
%
Early years
100
6%
Primary school
642
39%
Secondary school
334
20%
All-through school
137
8%
Sixth form / FE college
311
19%
Other
128
8%
Total
1,652
100%
Source: Survey data
Table 13: Survey respondents' role
Role
Individuals
%
Leadership
378
23%
Teaching
252
15%
SENCo
465
28%
Support
442
27%
Other
123
7%
Total
1,660
100%
Source: Survey data
105
Table 14: Survey respondents' academic year of engagement in USS
Year
Individuals
%
2021/2022
438
26%
2022/2023
550
33%
2023/2024
439
26%
2024/2025
233
14%
Total
1,660
100%
Source: Survey data
Table 15: Survey respondents' number of years in role
Years
Individuals
%
0-2
489
31%
3-5
442
28%
6-10
323
20%
11+
322
20%
Total
1,576
100%
Source: Survey data
Table 16: Whether survey respondents have additional responsibilities
Additional responsibilities
Individuals
%
Yes
432
26%
No
515
31%
Total
947
57%
Source: Survey data
106
Table 17: Survey respondents' number of activities engaged in
Number of activities
Individuals
%
engaged in
1
627
38%
2
379
23%
3
320
19%
4
181
11%
5
84
5%
6
31
2%
7
15
1%
8
13
1%
9
3
0.2%
11
1
0.1%
Total
1,654
100%
Source: Survey data
107
Department
for Education
© Crown copyright 2026
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0,
except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit
nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3
Where we have identified any third-party copyright information, you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
Reference: RR1589
ISBN: 978-1-83870-732-3
For any enquiries regarding this publication, contact www.gov.uk/contact-dfe.
This document is available for download at www.gov.uk/government/publications.
108
